SYDERSTONE PARSONAGE

"_To the Editor of the Norfolk Chronicle._

"SIR,--Having already borne my testimony to the occurrences of the
night of the 15th ult. in the Parsonage at Syderstone, and finding that
_ventriloquism and other devices_ are now resorted to as the probable
causes of them (and that, too, under the sanction of certain statements
put forth in your last week's paper), I feel myself called on to state
publicly that, although a diligent observer of the different events
which then took place, I witnessed no one circumstance which could
induce _me_ to indulge a conjecture that the _knocks_, _vibrations_,
_scratchings_, _groanings_ etc., which I heard, proceeded from any
member of Mr. Stewart's family, through the medium of mechanical or
other trickery:--indeed, it would seem to me utterly impossible that
the scratchings which fell under my observation during the night, in a
remote room of the house, could be so produced, as, at that time, every
member of Mr. Stewart's family was removed a considerable distance from
the spot.

"While making this declaration, I beg to state that my only object in
bearing any part in this mysterious affair has been to investigate
and to elicit the _truth_. I have ever desired to approach it without
_prejudging_ it--that is, with a mind willing to be influenced by
_facts_ alone,--without any inclination to establish either the
intervention of _human_ agency on the one hand, or of _super-human_
agency on the other hand:--at the same time, it is but common honesty
to state that Mr. Stewart expresses himself so fully conscious of his
own integrity towards the public that he has resolved on suffering all
the imputations and reflections which _have_ been or which may be cast
either upon himself or upon his family to pass without remark; and
as he has, at different times and upon different occasions, so fully
satisfied his own mind on the _impossibility_ of the disturbances in
question arising from the agency of any member of his own household
(and from the incessant research he has made on this point, he himself
must be the best judge), Mr. Stewart intends declining all future
interruptions of his family, by the interference of strangers.

"Perhaps, Mr. Editor, your distant readers may not be aware that Mr.
Stewart has not been resident at Syderstone more than fourteen months,
while mysterious noises are _now_ proved to have been heard in this
house, at different intervals and in different degrees of violence, for
the last thirty years and upwards. Most conclusive and satisfactory
affidavits on this point are now in progress, of the completion of
which you shall have notice in due time.--I am, Sir, your obedient
servant,

  "JOHN SPURGIN.

"DOCKING, _June 7, 1833_."

(_Norfolk Chronicle_, June 15, 1833.)

       *       *       *       *       *