
"_Thomas Mase_, of Syderstone, in the county of Norfolk, carpenter,
now voluntarily declareth, and is prepared at any time to confirm
the same on oath, and say: That one night, about eleven years ago,
while Mr. George Parsons occupied part of the Parsonage at Syderstone,
he happened to be sleeping in the attic there; and about midnight he
heard (he thinks he was awoke out of sleep) a dreadful noise, like the
sudden and heavy fall of part of the chimney upon the stove in the
lower sitting-room.--That the crash was so great that, although at a
considerable distance from the spot, he distinctly heard the noise, not
doubting the chimney had fallen and dashed the stove to pieces:--that
he arose and went downstairs (it being a light summer's night): but
upon examining the state of the room and stove, he found, to his
astonishment, everything as it ought to have been. And the said Thomas
Mase further states, that, upon another occasion, about eight or nine
years ago, while sleeping a night in Syderstone Parsonage in a room at
the south end thereof, the door of which room moved particularly hard
upon the floor, requiring to be lifted up in order to close or open
it, and producing a particular sound in its movement, he distinctly
heard all the sounds which accompanied its opening.--That he felt
certain the door was opened, and arose from his bed to shut it, but,
to his great surprise, he found the door closed, just as he had left
it.--And finally the said Thomas Mase states, that the circumstances
above related, arose from causes which he is totally at a loss to
explain.--This Declaration was made and signed this 18th day of June
1833, before me, Derick Hoste, one of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace for the County of Norfolk.

  "THOMAS MASE."

       *       *       *       *       *