THE PINES


"Who is the most interesting person in this institution?" my friend Dr.
Custance remarked, repeating my words. "If you mean from your point of
view--ghosts, I should say Dacre, George Richard Dacre. He is pretty
old now--close upon seventy, and very possibly you have never heard of
him. The case, with which he was somewhat closely connected, took place
in Cumberland about forty years ago, and the spot is still said to be
haunted. If you would like to hear all about it, come along, and I will
introduce you to him."

Custance led me into a room, where an old man, with a glistening bald
head and white beard, sat, leaning back in his chair, and examining his
hands with an air of strange intensity.

"Mr. Dacre," Custance remarked, "I have brought you a visitor, a Mr.
Elliot O'Donnell, who is very interested in the supernatural, and would
much like to hear some of your experiences."

The old man raised his eyes; they did not look at me, but beyond, far
beyond, into a world that seemed known only to himself.

"I have only had one experience," he said, "and that was a long while
ago; so long that, at times, it seems as if it must have happened to
me in another incarnation, when I was something out of doors--a pine or
an elm--something growing in a wood. I can still, occasionally, smell
resin, after one of those long hot summers we used to have,--seventy
or eighty years ago,--and occasionally hear the wind, the deliciously
cool, evening breezes, rustling and sighing, as it were, through my
branches and fanning my perspiring bark. Sit down, and I will tell you
all about it.

       *       *       *       *       *