Not less interesting is the following account of a Spectral Appearance
which occurred in the latter part of the afternoon of a bright autumnal
day, well authenticated, and here set forth for the first time:--

"The widow of a well-known Bristol merchant was, in 1856, acting as lady
housekeeper to a Berkshire clergyman. One of her sons was an officer in
the Indian army, and serving in the Madras Presidency. It was his custom
to write to his mother by every fortnightly mail. He had not missed doing
so with punctual regularity.

"One evening, however, between six and seven, in the month of October of
the above year, the lady in question was walking on the lawn before the
house, in company with the curate of the parish, a well-known Oxford man,
when all of a sudden both of them saw what appeared to be a dog-cart
containing three men drive along the lane which skirted the lawn and
flower-garden, and which was separated from it by a closely-cut
box-hedge, so low as to admit of those who were walking in the garden
seeing with ease and distinctness any person approaching the house in a
vehicle. It was driven in the direction of the carriage entrance, and,
from the sound, appeared to have entered the court-yard of the house. One
of the persons in it, he who sat behind, half rose, and looking towards
his mother and the clergyman, smiled, and waved his right hand as a
greeting. He looked very pale and ashy; otherwise there was nothing
remarkable in his appearance. Both most distinctly observed the action
just mentioned. Immediately on seeing it, the lady exclaimed with marked
feeling and excitement, 'Good heavens! why, there's Robert.' She at once
rushed through a passage of the house, which led directly to the
court-yard, only to find to her amazement and perplexity that no carriage
nor dog-cart had arrived, and that the large gates of the house were, as
usual, locked and fastened, and moreover had not been opened.

"The impression this remarkable incident made was deep and great. No doubt
whatever existed in the minds of those who had seen and heard the passing
vehicle, that the form on the seat behind was the son of the lady in
question. She consequently felt confident that some harm had happened to
him, became miserable, and was inconsolable. No remarks or reasoning to
the contrary, several of which were attempted, produced the slightest
effect. A deep gloom settled over her. The sequel can soon be narrated. In
the course of a few weeks the mail _vi√¢_ Southampton, most anxiously
looked for, brought two letters to the lady in question, one intimating
that her son had been suddenly struck with a most severe fever, was
delirious and in great danger; the other intimating his death. This latter
occurred on the very day at which the appearance in question was seen, but
at a slightly different time."
