With the following example, as strange in itself as it is painfully
interesting, this part of the subject will be brought to a close. It is
only right to add that a version of the incident which now follows has
already appeared in one of Mr. Henry Spicer's interesting volumes:--

"A young German lady of rank, still alive to tell the story, arriving with
her friends at one of the most noted hotels in Paris, an apartment of
unusual magnificence on the first floor was apportioned to her use. After
retiring to rest, she lay awake a long while contemplating, by the dim
light of a night lamp, the costly ornaments in the room, when suddenly the
folding doors opposite the bed, which she had locked, were thrown open,
and amid a flood of unearthly light there entered a young man in the dress
of the French navy, having his hair dressed in the peculiar mode _Ã  la
Titus_. Taking a chair, and placing it in the middle of the room, he sat
down, and took from his pocket a pistol of an uncommon make, which he
deliberately put to his forehead, fired, and fell back dead. At the moment
of the explosion, the room became dark and still, and a low voice said
softly, 'Say an _Ave Maria_ for his soul.'

"The young lady fell back, not insensible, but paralyzed with horror, and
remained in a kind of cataleptic trance, fully conscious, but unable to
move or speak, until at nine o'clock, no answer having been given to
repeated calls of her maid, the doors were forced open. At the same
moment, the powers of speech returned, and the poor young lady shrieked
out to her attendants that a man had shot himself in the night, and was
lying dead on the floor. Nothing, however, was to be seen, and they
concluded that she was suffering from the effects of a dream.

"A short time afterwards, however, the proprietor of the hotel informed a
gentleman of the party that the terrible scene witnessed by the young lady
had in reality been enacted only three nights previously in that very
room, when a young French officer put an end to his life with a pistol of
a peculiar description, which, together with the body, was then lying at
the Morgue, awaiting identification. The gentleman examined them both, and
found them exactly correspond with the description of the man and the
pistol seen in the apparition. The Archbishop of Paris, Monseigneur
Sibour, being exceedingly impressed by the story, called upon the young
lady; and, directing her attention to the words spoken by the mysterious
voice, urged her to embrace the Roman Catholic faith, to whose teaching,
as His Grace asserted, it pointed so clearly."
