The various examples of Spectral Appearances now given (and they might
have been largely augmented) may certainly serve to provide cases, so
inherently striking and conclusive in themselves, as to leave little or no
doubt of their intrinsic truth. Making every allowance for unintentional
misconceptions and exaggeration in the record of them, putting aside mere
rhetorical ornaments and literary additions, it seems quite impossible,
being guided by the ordinary rules of evidence, not to admit the force and
value of such striking facts as the above. In the cases already set forth,
it is quite irrational to maintain that the disturbed imagination or wild
fancy of the persons who are said to have seen the Apparitions were the
sole foundations of the things seen; more especially as in some instances
the Appearances were beheld by two or more persons at the same time, and
often the same form presented itself to different people upon different
occasions. It may be that some own a power of seeing disembodied spirits,
which is not possessed by others, and it is tolerably certain that the
large majority of people have never beheld anything of the sort. But this,
after all, is but negative testimony. That which is positive, covering, it
may be, a small area, is of considerable value and importance in aiding
those who are open to conviction in coming to a reasonable conclusion. For
existing positive evidence cannot be rudely and arrogantly set aside, when
found to be, as in the case under consideration, so completely in harmony
with many of the plain and specific statements of Holy Scripture, with the
express testimony of the Fathers of the Christian Church, and the almost
universal tradition of mankind in every age.



