CHAPTER VIII.

MODERN SPIRITUALISM.


When, in a country where for at least twelve centuries the Christian
Religion has been accepted, and by which that country has received unknown
blessings both temporal and spiritual, schools of thought arise, in which
Historical Christianity is not simply patronized, but put out of court,
the phenomenon is both portentous and noteworthy. That this is so at the
present time in England with many, need scarcely be pointed out. The
scepticism which has deluged the Continent, coming upon a people whose
religious convictions had been so seriously disturbed by the Reformation,
and whose conceptions of objective political truth had been so ruthlessly
disorganized by the events of the Commonwealth and the Revolution of 1688,
has found the ground well prepared for a scattering of the seeds of doubt.
Abroad they were sown some generations ago, and brought forth deadly
fruit. The French Revolution and its horrors followed as a matter of
course. Events before our eyes tell in very plain language that our own
turn has at last come.[41] The day of trial is now upon us. True, the
vulgarity of the eighteenth-century unbelievers is not at present so
manifestly apparent; though it exists amongst certain active leaders of
the lower classes with whom scepticism is popular. But the tone and temper
of public opinion, the bold utterances of serials and newspapers, the
public political policy now in vogue and popular, the too general
understanding that Christianity is to be as far as possible ignored in
legislation--all indicate the steady and rapid progress of sceptical
liberalism.

The Broad Church party in the established communion has done much, and
will no doubt do much more, to eliminate the Supernatural from the minds
of its admirers and of the people of England. Disliking dogma, its
teaching, when the fog which surrounds it allows that teaching to be
partly comprehended, is of the earth earthy. It dovetails in with the low
material views and carnal desires of the money-grubbing many. Its ideal of
bliss, not always wrapped up in philosophical jargon (and therefore
sometimes intelligible), is simply commercial prosperity and temporal
wealth; eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, comfort,
material pleasure and ease; the conquest of Nature by scientific research
and progress; an enjoyment of the present and only the present; and a
complete banishment of the old-world theology--useful, it may have been,
in times gone by, when the World was being educated; but now to be thrown
aside as lumber, worn out and valueless. In place of that Historical
Christianity accepted since the days of S. Augustine of Canterbury, we are
promised doubt, disbelief, a refined as well as an unrefined intellectual
Paganism; and in the end--though such an end may not now be contemplated
by all members of that ecclesiastical school--a positive rejection of the
distinct nature of God.

At present, of course, the figure is decently draped. Its ugly proportions
and hateful outline are not apparent. Its admirers have to accommodate
themselves with some skill to the strong prejudices of the age; to
tolerate systems which they contemn, to carry out the silent but certain
operation of destruction, under the hypocritical desire of assisting
mankind to complete the work of temporal progress.

All this is before us and around us, if we would but note it. And this
being so, the state of thought and of society, as few can fail to observe,
is eminently calculated to afford those who disbelieve in the
Supernatural, good opportunities of advance in the direction of negations.
On the other hand, the presence amongst us of a sect of persons who call
themselves "Spiritualists," and whose notorious words and works may be
noted and criticized, is full of moment and importance. Spiritualism, when
first it appeared and took shape, was treated with contempt. The facts
urged by its supporters were denied; the manifestations almost universally
disbelieved in. It was declared to be the work of acute knaves, or the
offspring of idle and imaginative dreamers. Public writers treated it with
scornful contempt. Reports of its strange proceedings and extraordinary
developments were knowingly and deliberately suppressed. It was hastily
hustled off the public stage, refused a hearing, and denied a defence.
This policy, however convenient to its promoters, has failed. Sneers have
not killed it. Its ideas and theories have been recently reduced to a
formal system, while its votaries have increased to an extent scarcely
credited. Christians and non-Christians, Roman Catholics,
Church-of-England people and Protestants, have ranged themselves under
its banner, and accept and propagate its views. To some the existence of
spurious coin proves the value of the true; and the portents of these
latter times are surely full of warning and value.

At all periods, it should be observed, certain classes of leaders of men's
thoughts have succeeded in banishing the Supernatural from the field of
human action. For example, Thucydides, representing the World exclusively
in its natural aspect, did this. He had neither ear nor eye for the
marvellous. In recent times, from the period of Locke to the beginning of
the present century, a similar course was adopted by a very influential
school of writers, remarkable for their careful dismissal of the
miraculous, both from ken and consideration. To such, the World was a
machine, wound up once for all by its Author, and needing no further
application of that power which appeared to have spent itself, so to
speak, in the act of creation. Like S. Peter's "scoffers," "walking after
their own lusts," they practically declared, "since the fathers fell
asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of
creation."[42]

But, of course, such a state of thought could only be transitory. The
universal convictions of man's conscience, and the most earnest desires of
his heart, produced a reversion of opinion. The very dogmatic
philosophers soon found themselves at sea. Reason and Imagination were
starved, while the Understanding was profoundly flattered. This has so
turned out, not once, nor twice, but continually. Scepticism has followed
Superstition, and Superstition Scepticism. Wherever the Catholic Religion,
having once been had, has been deliberately cast out and denied, there, as
in Scotland at the present day, Superstition is more than ordinarily
widespread and rampant. The Gnosticism and Manich√¶ism of the early
Christian era have reproduced themselves in later times; while Materialism
has lived side by side with that Superstition which, on the surface, it
seemed so necessary for the same Materialism to deny.
