And then Mr. Crookes testifies that not only spirit-hands, but spectres or
spirit-persons in their entirety, were seen:--

"In the dusk of the evening, during a _s√©ance_ with Mr. Home at my house,
the curtains of a window about eight feet from Mr. Home were seen to move.
A dark, shadowy, semi-transparent form like that of a man was then seen by
all present standing near the window, waving the curtain with his hand. As
we looked, the form faded away and the curtain ceased to move. The
following is a still more striking instance. As in the former case, Mr.
Home was the medium. A phantom form came from a corner of the room, took
an accordion in its hand, and then glided about the room playing the
instrument. The form was visible to all present for many minutes, Mr. Home
also being seen at the same time. Coming rather close to a lady who was
sitting apart from the rest of the company, she gave a slight cry, upon
which it vanished" (p. 90).

In conclusion Mr. Crookes sets forth five current theories with regard to
these and similar phenomena; one of which theories is clearly expressed
in the following sentence. These supernatural manifestations, he asserts,
some maintain to be "the actions of Evil Spirits or Devils, personifying
who or what they please, in order to undermine Christianity and to ruin
men's souls" (p. 96). Such a definition, it may be added, is in perfect
accordance with ordinary experience, the testimony of Scripture, the
action and teaching of the living Church, as well as a fulfilment of
express and definite prophecies regarding "the latter days."



