More recently the manifestations have been still further developed. From
the "Spiritual Magazine" the following is quoted:--

"The _s√©ance_ was held by appointment. Our object being that of
investigation, we limited the number to three, and, I must add, used every
precaution we could think of to preclude the possibility of
self-deception; we likewise guarded against any possible preparatory
arrangement. Accordingly, we changed from the library to the dining-room.
We were soon seated at a heavy square table. Twenty minutes passed without
any manifestation; then came gentle raps, followed by the table being
lifted, tilted, and gently vibrated. Then raps were heard simultaneously
in different and opposite parts of the room. At my suggestion, the lamp
was partly turned down, when a cold current of air was felt to pass over
our hands and faces. A pause ensued. The dining-room table leaf standing
in the corner of the room then commenced to vibrate, and one of the leaves
being taken from the stand, was passed between Mr. Home and the table at
which we were seated. It was then raised straight up, and passing
vertically over my friend, gently touched him; in passing over me, it
struck me on the crown of the head, but so gently, that I could hardly
realize it to be the heavy leaf of the dining-room table; the touch
nevertheless caused the leaf to vibrate all but sonorously. I name this to
prove how delicately balanced and suspended in the air the leaf of the
table must have been to have produced the vibration. It then passed over
to the right, touching my shoulders, and finally was placed upon the table
at which we were seated. The distance the leaf was carried I compute at
nearly twelve yards (allowing for the circuit made), and at an elevation
of six feet. A small round table was then moved from the corner of the
room, and placed next to my friend; and in reply to his question '_who it
was_,' he received the answer, audible to us all, '_Pa, Pa,--dear--darling
Pa_.' An arm-chair behind my friend, and at a distance of three yards, was
raised up straight into the air, carried over our heads, and placed upon
the dining-room table to my left, a voice clearly and loudly repeating the
words, 'Papa's chair.' We then observed the wooden box of the accordion
being carried from the extreme corner of the room up to my friend. In
passing my right hand, I passed my hand under and over the box, as it
travelled suspended in the air to my front. I did this to make sure of the
fact of its being moved by an invisible agency, and not by means of
mechanical aid.... The accordion was then taken from Mr. Home, carried
about in the room, and played. Voices were distinctly heard; a low
whispering, and voices imitating the break of a wave on the shore.
Finally, the accordion placed itself upon the table we were seated at, and
two luminous hands were distinctly seen resting on the keys of the
instrument. They remained luminously visible for from twenty to thirty
seconds, and then melted away. I had, in the meantime, and at the request
of my friend, taken hold of the accordion; whilst so held by me, an
invisible hand laid hold of the instrument, and played for two or three
minutes what appeared to me to be sacred music. Voices were then heard, a
kind of murmuring or low whistling and breathing; at times in imitation of
the murmur of the waves of the sea, at other times more plaintively
melodious. The accordion was then a second time taken by an invisible
power, carried over our heads, and a small piece of sacred music
played,--then a hymn, voices in deep sonorous notes singing the
hallelujah. I thought I could make out three voices, but my friend said he
could speak to four. A jet of light then crossed the room, after which a
star or brilliantly illuminated disk, followed by the appearance of a
softly luminous column of light, which moved up between me and my friend.
I cannot say that I could discern any distinct outline. The luminous
column appeared to me to be about five to six feet high, the subdued soft
light mounting from it half illumining the room. The column or luminous
appearance then passed to my right, and a chair was moved and placed next
to me. I distinctly heard the rustling as of a silk dress. Instinctively I
put my hand forward to ascertain the presence of the guest, when a soft
hand seized my hand and wrist. I then felt that the skirt of a dress had
covered my knees. I grasped it; it felt like thick silk, and melted away
as I firmly clenched my hand on it. By this time I admit I shuddered. A
heavy footstep then passed to my right, the floor vibrating to the
footfall; the spirit-form now walked up to the fire-place, clapping its
hands as it passed me. I then felt something press against the back of my
chair; the weight was so great, that as the form leaned on my shoulder, I
had to bend forward under the pressure. Two hands gently pressed my
forehead; I noticed a luminous appearance at my right; I was kissed, and
what to me at the time made my very frame thrill again, spoken to in a
sweet, low, melodious voice. The words uttered by the spirit were
distinctly heard by all present. As the spirit-form passed away, it
repeated the words, 'I kissed you, I kissed you,' and I felt three taps
on each shoulder, audible to all present, as if in parting to reimpress me
with the reality of its presence. I shuddered again, and, in spite of all
my heroism, felt very 'uncanny.' My friend now called our attention to his
being patted by a soft hand on his head. I heard a kiss, and then the
words, 'Papa, dear papa.' He said his left hand was being kissed, and that
a soft, child-like hand was caressing him. A cloud of light appeared to be
standing at his left."
