Another example, from the same publication, deserves to be put on
record:--

"The first group of the manifestations (I use the term 'group' to mark the
characteristic difference of the phenomena on each occasion,) occurred at
a friend's house at Great Malvern. Those present had only incidentally
met; and, owing to a prohibition being laid upon Mr. Home by his medical
man against trying his strength, no _s√©ance_ was attempted. I name this as
characteristic. Raps in different parts of the room, and the movement of
furniture, however, soon told the presence of the invisibles. The library
in which the party had met communicated with the hall; and the door having
been left half open, a broad stream of light from the burners of the
gas-lamp lit up the room. At the suggestion of one of the party, the
candles were removed. The rapping, which had till then been heard in
different parts of the room, suddenly made a pause, and then the unusual
phenomena of the appearance of spirit-forms manifested itself. The opening
of the half-closed door was suddenly darkened by an invisible agency, the
room becoming pitch dark. Then the wall opposite became illumined, the
library now being lit up by a luminous element, for it cannot be described
otherwise. Between those present and the opposite and now illumined wall
two spirit-forms were seen, their shadowy outline on the wall well
defined. The forms moved to and fro. They made an effort to speak; the
articulation, however, was too imperfect to permit of the meaning of the
words to be understood. The darkening which had obscured the half-closed
door was then removed, and the broad light from the hall lamp reappeared,
looking quite dim in comparison with the luminous brilliancy of the light
that had passed away. Again the room became darkened, then illumined, and
a colossal head and shoulders appeared to rise from the floor, visible
only by the shadow it cast upon the illumined wall. What added to the
interest was the apparent darkening and lighting up of the room at will,
and that repeatedly, the library door remaining half open all the while.
The time occupied by these phenomena was perhaps five to ten minutes, the
manifestations terminating quite abruptly."
