A correspondent of the same serial gives the following facts:--

"On the 1st October, 1865, I attended a _s√©ance_ at 13, Victoria Place,
Clifton, where the younger Mrs. Marshall, the well-known medium from
London, was staying.

"I had previously prepared, as a test, a series of written questions
inserted in a book and numbered consecutively; my wife, who was present,
was by the usual method put in communication with the spirit of her
mother, and the following are a few of the results. It is important to
observe that no clue was given to the medium, or to the others present, as
to the nature of the answer required, the questions being put in the
following form:--'Will you answer the question No. 33?' &c., and as the
answers were occasionally given in a different form from what was
anticipated, though still quite correctly, these two facts taken together
conclusively prove, as it appears to me, that the answers were neither the
result of any knowledge on the part of the medium, nor any 'reflex action'
from the mind of the interrogator.

"The spirit having been requested to answer the question numbered 33,
viz.:--'Will you spell the name of the place where we lived when you left
this state?' The reply, spelt through the alphabet, was 'Aust.'

"Question No. 34 having been put in the same manner, viz.:--'Where was
your body buried?' The reply was, 'Saint George's.'

"No. 35.--'While your body was lying in the coffin, was anything put in
the hand?'[51] Reply, 'Yes.'

"No. 36.--'What was it?' Reply, 'A sprig of myrtle.'

"No. 37.--'By whom was it put there?' Reply, 'Thomas Bowman.'

"No. 38.--'Who else were present at the time?' Reply, 'Ann, Tommy and Mary
Bowman Bryant.'

"Many other replies were given of an equally satisfactory character, but I
must not further trespass on your space. I would merely remark that the
answers in each case were quite correct, and that the events referred to
occurred upwards of forty years since."
