Again, Mr. James Howell, of 7, Guildford Road, Brighton, writes as follows
in the "Spiritual Magazine" for November, 1867:--

"When I was at the Marshalls' last summer, a circumstance, unknown to
anyone present save myself, was made known to me by unaccountable means.
The name of a young lady who suffered and died from spinal complaint in
the year 1843 was correctly spelled out, and the date of her death given.
I was most intimately acquainted with her. She was good, pious, and highly
intellectual. To her I owe my knowledge of the French language, and my
love of its literature. I was not thinking of her at the time; in fact,
she was furthest from my thoughts; yet her name--a very uncommon one, you
will admit--was given correctly, 'Aletta V----.' Now I am honest enough to
confess that a million guesses would not have guessed that name. I was
astounded and affected; for it brought back to my mind a rush of thoughts,
happy and sad, of those evenings when I sat by her bedside listening to
her sweet voice, and imbibing the original thoughts which sprang, not only
from a well-stored mind, but one instinct with genius. Twenty-three years
had elapsed from the time of her death; she had often promised to
communicate with me from the spirit-world, if it was possible, and now
that promise was fulfilled, even in the presence of others."

And once more, the same writer gives the following record of facts:--

"I paid a visit on Monday, July 2nd, to Mrs. Parks, of Cornwall Terrace,
Regent's Park, then staying at 7, Bedford Square. Miss Purcell, the
medium, went with me; and we three had some strong and wonderful
manifestations. The table was turned about merrily, and once whirled round
in mid-air. It became as animated as a living being; it even ran about
when not a single being touched it. Knockings were heard all over the
room; in chairs, in tables, under the floor, and along the wainscot. We
had great trouble to keep the tables from being smashed.

"During the evening, the 'Blue Bells of Scotland' and '_Marlbrook s'en
va-t-en guerre_' were knocked out on the table in a beautiful and correct
manner, the table beating and dancing admirable time to each tune. At a
previous _s√©ance_ a well-known tune was knocked out, and my wife was
requested to dance, the spirits stating that the table should accompany
her; but as we could not induce her to do so, we lost the promised _pas de
deux_ between a human being and a table. At my request the table also gave
a series of knocks, viz. the footman's, the postman's, the tax-gatherer's,
and the countryman's, which were perfect, and caused us much amusement. In
one part of the room there appeared a silvery, bluish star, shining
brilliantly. Mrs. Parks, strange to say, could not see it, but to the
medium and myself it was clearly visible, at the same time too; and a
brilliant member of the stellar creation it was, coming and going like
those of the sky, when for a moment a veil of clouds passes over them."
