We obtain from these extracts, which might be multiplied thirty-fold from
the authorized publications of the Spiritualists, some idea of the nature
of their _s√©ances_ and proceedings. Our own statement at the outset has
been more than justified as regards its moderation and accuracy from the
examples provided in the extracts in question. "Necromancy" has been well
defined to be "The art of communicating with devils and of doing
surprising things by means of their aid; particularly that of calling up
the dead and extorting answers from them." Now this, it seems clear, in
one form or another, is precisely that which is carried on by a
considerable and increasing section[52] of people in America, in England,
on the Continent, and elsewhere. It is practised mainly by persons who
were such extreme Protestants in previous times that, having almost
altogether denied the Supernatural, they have been reluctantly won over to
a belief in it by communion with evil spirits. Father Perrone, the
distinguished Jesuit, has calculated that upwards of two thousand
treatises have been published in defence of the system of these
manifestations during the past fifteen years. It has been pointedly
remarked by an English clergyman, of those people who once, like the
ancient Sadducees, rejected the idea of the existence of spirits, but who
now have accepted the Spiritualistic theory, that "they have given up
believing in nothing, and have taken to believe in the Devil."[53] And
this epigrammatic saying is hardly too pointed. According to Perrone, the
modern professors of divination frankly allow that the phenomena have
passed through three phases. First, that of Mesmerism; secondly,
artificial Somnambulism and Clairvoyance; and thirdly, Spiritualism,
properly so called. He gives five reasons for maintaining his theory of
diabolical agency with regard to the same. 1. From the nature of the
phenomena. 2. From its effects. 3. From the manner in which Mesmerism
operates. 4. From the malice and wickedness of the agent, who frequently
utters anti-Christian and blasphemous doctrines; and lastly, 5. from the
frank and candid admission of the mediums or operators themselves.

In most cases it may be safely assumed that evil spirits personify the
souls of the departed. That such spirits are the deadly foes of man so
long as he is in his period of probation, may, for all Catholic
Christians, be also assumed. That such spirits, moreover, constantly
represent the departed as continually desiring the hand of Death to fall
upon their earthly friends, in order, as is implied or stated, that a
future of unclouded light and everlasting happiness may speedily link them
together, can be seen from a careful study of the records of Spiritualism.
Some of the facts already set forth teach this. The principle that men,
whether good or bad, righteous or unrighteous, will all be certainly
saved, and be for ever hereafter in bliss, is the practical heresy[54]
that Spiritualism in its theological aspect has most openly taught, and
still continues to teach. "Spiritualism," writes Mr. William Howitt, a
convert to it from Quakerism, "rejects the doctrine of eternal damnation
as alike injurious to God and man. Injurious to God's noblest attributes,
repugnant to the principles of justice, and unavailing in men as a motive
to repentance.... Spiritualism knows that there are isolated passages in
the Gospels and in the words of our Saviour capable of being made to bear
an appearance favouring the doctrine of eternal punishment, but it knows
that the original terms bear no such latitude, and when Christ says there
is a state 'where the worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched,' it
admits the state, but denies that any of God's creatures will continue in
that state a minute longer than is necessary to purge the foulness of sin
and the love of sin out of their spiritual constitutions. Were the
solution of this supposed difficulty much harder than it is, Spiritualism
would place the love of God and the love of Christ, and all the great and
gracious attributes of God and His Saviour--justice and truth and wisdom,
and a charity more immeasurable than God Himself recommends to mankind,
confidently and courageously against so horrible and senseless a
doctrine."
