The following remarkable passage is singularly true and accurate in its
estimate of an unmistakeable historical fact, viz., that the Oxford
movement to a great extent left out of consideration[78] the continued
existence of modern miracles in the Christian Church. Mr. Lecky writes
thus:--"At Oxford these narratives (_i. e._ the record of patristic and
medi√¶val miracles) hardly exercised a serious attention. What little
influence they had was chiefly an influence of repression; what little was
written in their favour was written for the most part in the tone of an
apology, as if to attenuate a difficulty rather than to establish a creed.
This was surely a very remarkable characteristic of the Tractarian
movement, when we remember the circumstances and attainments of its
leaders, and the great prominence which miraculous evidence had long
occupied in England. It was especially remarkable when we reflect that one
of the great complaints which the Tractarian party were making against
modern theology was, that the conception of the Supernatural had become
faint and dim, and that its manifestations were either explained away or
confined to a distant past. It would seem as if those who were most
conscious of the character of their age were unable, in the very midst of
their opposition, to free themselves from its tendencies."--Vol. i. pp.
165-166.

It must be allowed that there is some amount of truth in this
temperately-made charge. Whatever else may have been pressed forward, and
with success, it is obvious that the active energy of the Supernatural has
been kept somewhat in the background. At all events it has not been made
too prominent. Even in books of devotion, adapted from Roman Catholic
sources, examples of miracles have been omitted; and so the golden threads
which were so rudely broken three centuries and a half ago, are still in
the mire; for few have cared to gather them up once more and weave them
into a perfect whole. That work has still to be done. Not until there be
what a modern writer terms "daring faith"--faith which can move
mountains--should the work be attempted.

And now, fully alive to its imperfections, I bring my book to its close.

It has been briefly shown herein what a great influence the materialistic
speculations of a few bold and over-confident writers have recently
exercised on current thought. At the same time the presence of the
Supernatural in Church History has been made perfectly manifest, and
abundant sources pointed out from which additional examples may readily be
gathered for consideration by those who may desire to gather them. Side by
side, however, with that which in the Supernatural order is good and
beneficial to man, energizes that which is evil. There are angels and
there are demons. There is light and there is darkness. Numberless armies
of glorious spirits, as the Divine Revelation tells us,[79] stand, rank by
rank and order by order, as the bright ornaments of the City of God. Their
subtlety, their quickness of penetration, their extensive knowledge of
natural things, are undoubtedly perfect in proportion to the excellency of
their being, inasmuch as they are pure intelligences, perfect from the
Hand of their Maker. They know the concerns of mortal men.[80] They are
our protectors, our patrons, our guides. For us they lift up their prayers
to God, and they are near us in our trials and temptations. Their motion
is swift as thought, their activity inconceivable. As they are the friends
of mankind by God's decree, so specially do they become the guardians of
the regenerate and the particular protectors of the innocent and young.
And their beneficent actions are not altogether unknown. The old records
tell of their charity; man's experience testifies to their presence. And,
furthermore, for man's behoof in his time of trial, and for his eternal
advantage hereafter, were given those powers and properties which belong
to the Church by the grace and efficacy of the Sacraments.

Yet, on the other hand, until the number of the Elect is accomplished, the
Enemy of Souls, the Prince of the Powers of the Air, is permitted to wield
an alarming influence; while too often the natural man, with his will
free, wills to remain his servant. Yea; and even the baptized, too. For by
Witchcraft, Sorcery, and Necromancy Satan still works, men being his
direct agents and slaves. Sometimes in one form, sometimes in another, he
dupes those who seek him; while his legions suggest to men's minds evil
thoughts, paint dangerous objects to the imagination, frequently direct
the active current of the human heart to sin, and finally turn round and
accuse their captives at the tribunal of God the Judge of all. So must it
be to the end, for this life is man's time of probation.

Of Dreams and Warnings, Omens and Presentiments, much has been written.
Each example must be considered on its own merits; for perhaps no coherent
theory will sufficiently cover and explain all the instances here already
adduced.

So, too, with Spectral Appearances and Haunted Localities. While
experience testifies to the facts recorded, such Glimpses of the
Supernatural may be well left to tell their own story, to leave their own
impression, and set forth their own teaching. To those who possess the
grace and habit of faith they will not seem over-strange, for as Hamlet
remarked to his friend--

  "There are more things in Heaven and Earth, Horatio,
   Than are dreamt of in our philosophy."

As I prepare to lay down my pen, I cannot but notice and put on record
what amid "the triumphs of Science," so frequently start up to confront
us, viz. the sad records of calamity brought to notice, and the gloomy
scenes of deepest misery which are yet so frequently depicted. "Woe is
me!" is man's wail still. But with many the Supernatural, as we too well
know, is bidden to stand aside. The Catholic Religion is written of as
antiquated, out of date, and effete. The truth of the Christian Revelation
is openly denied. Yet may not the terrible disasters of which we hear, and
the miserable calamities which so constantly occur along the path of
"human progress" and "scientific triumph," be permitted by God Almighty as
an intelligible and richly deserved rebuke to lofty looks and the impious
and blasphemous thoughts of the proud?[81]

Man's life in this country is certainly not longer than it was eight or
ten centuries ago. He dies as he died. Nor is the race of Englishmen
sturdier, finer, or better grown than of old. The tombs of the Crusaders
tell us this. Look at the stately figures of the Fitzalans in Bedale
Church, or at those of the Marmions in that of Tanfield, and it may be
that in this practical particular deterioration instead of progress should
be more fittingly and faithfully recorded. As is obvious enough, Science,
with all the boasting of its adherents, can, after all, effect but little.
True it is that wonderful discoveries are made in the Realms of Nature.
Operations untraced before, are now accurately apprehended; and secrets,
long hidden, are triumphantly brought to light. One might imagine from the
random confidence of some (as guides more shallow than safe), that Science
had discovered an appliance for every human weakness, an antidote to every
physical evil or disease, an unfailing specific against every want and
woe. Yet, after all its researches and with all its supposed discoveries
(for many may have been known and lost), never were failures so great or
misfortunes so heavy. The ugly iron ship of the present day, hideous in
form and appearance, yet constructed with all the obtainable skill of
modern science, at an enormous sacrifice of expense, fitted with
life-boats and patent scientific life-preservers, divided into
compartments, after due calculations (on a scientific method), suddenly
goes down, where a fisherman of six centuries ago, in his wooden skiff,
would have ridden a storm securely, and becomes an iron coffin for five or
six hundred corpses, rotting where the seaweed grows. Again, War, with
scientific appliances--in the invention and preparation of which the great
nations are active rivals--marches over a great country, defended by the
highest military art and strength, and in a few short months reduces its
people to spoliation, tribute, and shame. Less than a century ago, nearly
a twenty years' struggle would have been made, ere such a sudden and
sweeping contest could have been so securely sealed.

Human Art may do something, and Science may effect more: but how
frequently some little flaw or casualty defeats all! The boastings of
Science, consequently, become vain and vapid: its works lie in the dust.
Past ages have had their pride humbled; as Tyre and Alexandria and Babylon
too eloquently tell. When God, by the insolence of intellect, is thrust
aside, He sometimes, nevertheless, mercifully but efficiently reminds men
that He is. When the Supernatural is deliberately denied and scornfully
rejected, suffering may serve to open the eyes of the blind and make the
dumb to speak. The general tendency in these days is to worship Mind,
Intelligence, and Power, for Might, with too many, is Right. Literary
jargon setting forth this duty may be constantly read. The wisest action
for the truly wise is to turn away from such; for the noblest and proudest
ambition of a Christian's life should consist in being humble worshippers
of Him the One Author of the Supernatural and the Natural, Whose only
power is infinite, Whose knowledge and wisdom are boundless, and Whose
abiding love and mercy are over all His works.

