I. CONNLA AND THE FAIRY MAIDEN.

_Source._--From the old Irish "Echtra Condla chaim maic Cuind
Chetchathaig" of the _Leabhar na h-Uidhre_ ("Book of the Dun Cow"),
which must have been written before 1106, when its scribe Maelmori
("Servant of Mary") was murdered. The original is given by Windisch
in his _Irish Grammar_. p. 120, also in the _Trans. Kilkenny Archæol.
Soc._ for 1874. A fragment occurs in a Rawlinson MS., described by Dr.
W. Stokes, _Tripartite Life_, p. xxxvi. I have used the translation of
Prof. Zimmer in his _Keltische Beitrage_, ii. (_Zeits. f. deutsches
Altertum_, Bd. xxxiii., 262-4). Dr. Joyce has a somewhat florid
version in his _Old Celtic Romances_, from which I have borrowed a
touch or two. I have neither extenuated nor added aught but the last
sentence of the Fairy Maiden's last speech. Part of the original is in
metrical form, so that the whole is of the _cante-fable_ species,
which I believe to be the original form of the folk-tale (_Cf. Eng.
Fairy Tales_, notes, p. 240, and _infra_, p. 257).

_Parallels._--Prof. Zimmer's paper contains three other accounts of
the _terra repromissionis_ in the Irish sagas, one of them being the
similar adventure of Cormac, the nephew of Connla, or Condla Ruad as
he should be called. The fairy apple of gold occurs in Cormac Mac
Art's visit to the Brug of Manannan (Nutt's _Holy Grail_, 193).

_Remarks._--Conn, the hundred-fighter, had the head-kingship of
Ireland 123-157 A. D., according to the _Annals of the Four Masters_,
i., 105. On the day of his birth the five great roads from Tara to all
parts of Ireland were completed: one of them from Dublin is still
used. Connaught is said to have been named after him, but this is
scarcely consonant with Joyce's identification with Ptolemy's
_Nagnatai_ (_Irish Local Names_, i., 75). But there can be little
doubt of Conn's existence as a powerful ruler in Ireland in the second
century. The historic existence of Connla seems also to be
authenticated by the reference to him as Conly, the eldest son of
Conn, in the Annals of Clonmacnoise. As Conn was succeeded by his
third son, Art Enear, Connla was either slain or disappeared during
his father's lifetime. Under these circumstances it is not unlikely
that our legend grew up within the century after Conn--_i. e._, during
the latter half of the second century.

As regards the present form of it, Prof. Zimmer (_l. c._ 261-2) places
it in the seventh century. It has clearly been touched up by a
Christian hand, who introduced the reference to the day of judgment
and to the waning power of the Druids. But nothing turns upon this
interpolation, so that it is likely that even the present form of the
legend is pre-Christian--_i. e._, for Ireland, pre-Patrician, before
the fifth century.

The tale of Connla is thus the earliest fairy tale of modern Europe.
Besides this interest it contains an early account of one of the most
characteristic Celtic conceptions, that of the earthly Paradise, the
Isle of Youth, _Tir na n-Og_. This has impressed itself on the
European imagination; in the Arthuriad it is represented by the Vale
of Avalon, and as represented in the various Celtic visions of the
future life, it forms one of the main sources of Dante's _Divina
Commedia_. It is possible, too, I think, that the Homeric Hesperides
and the Fortunate Isles of the ancients had a Celtic origin (as is
well known, the early place-names of Europe are predominantly Celtic).
I have found, I believe, a reference to the conception in one of the
earliest passages in the classics dealing with the Druids. Lucan, in
his _Pharsalia_ (i, 450-8), addresses them in these high terms of
reverence:

    Et vos barbaricos ritus, moremque sinistrum,
    Sacrorum, Druidæ, positis repetistis ab armis,
    Solis nôsse Deos et coeli numera vobis
    Aut solis nescire datum; nemora alta remotis
    Incolitis lucis. Vobis auctoribus umbræ,
    Non tacitas Erebi sedes, Ditisque profundi,
    Pallida regna petunt: _regit idem spiritus artus_
    _Orbe alio_: longæ, canitis si cognita, vitæ
    Mors media est.

The passage certainly seems to me to imply a different conception from
the ordinary classical views of the life after death, the dark and
dismal plains of Erebus peopled with ghosts; and the passage I have
italicised would chime in well with the conception of a continuance of
youth (_idem spiritus_) in Tir na n-Og (_orbe alio_).

One of the most pathetic, beautiful, and typical scenes in Irish
legend is the return of Ossian from Tir na n-Og, and his interview
with St. Patrick. The old faith and the new, the old order of things
and that which replaced it, meet in two of the most characteristic
products of the Irish imagination (for the Patrick of legend is as
much a legendary figure as Oisin himself). Ossian had gone away to Tir
na n-Og with the fairy Niamh under very much of the same circumstances
as Condla Ruad; time flies in the land of eternal youth, and when
Ossian returns, after a year, as he thinks, more than three centuries
had passed, and St. Patrick had just succeeded in introducing the new
faith. The contrast of Past and Present has never been more vividly or
beautifully represented.

