V. CONALL YELLOWCLAW.

_Source._--Campbell, _Pop. Tales of West Highlands_, No. v. pp. 105-8.
"Conall Cra Bhuidhe." I have softened the third episode, which is
somewhat too ghastly in the original. I have translated "Cra Bhuide"
Yellowclaw on the strength of Campbell's etymology, _l. c._ p. 158.

_Parallels._--Campbell's vi. and vii. are two variants showing how
wide-spread the story is in Gaelic Scotland. It occurs in Ireland
where it has been printed in the chapbook, _Hibernian Tales_, as the
"Black Thief and the Knight of the Glen," the Black Thief being
Conall, and the knight corresponding to the King of Lochlan (it is
given in Mr. Lang's _Red Fairy Book_). Here it attracted the notice of
Thackeray, who gives a good abstract of it in his _Irish Sketch-Book_,
ch. xvi. He thinks it "worthy of the Arabian Nights, as wild and odd
as an Eastern tale." "That fantastic way of bearing testimony to the
previous tale by producing an old woman who says the tale is not only
true, but who was the very old woman who lived in the giant's castle
is almost" (why "almost," Mr. Thackeray?) "a stroke of genius." The
incident of the giant's breath occurs in the story of Koisha Kayn,
MacInnes's _Tales_, p. 241, as well as the Polyphemus one, _ibid._
265. One-eyed giants are frequent in Celtic folk-tales (_e. g._, in
_The Pursuit of Diarmaid_ and in the _Mabinogi_ of Owen).

_Remarks._--Thackeray's reference to the "Arabian Nights" is
especially apt, as the tale of Conall is a framework story like _The
1001 Nights_, the three stories told by Conall being framed, as it
were, in a fourth which is nominally the real story. This method
employed by the Indian story-tellers and from them adopted by
Boccaccio and thence into all European literatures (Chaucer, Queen
Margaret, &c.), is generally thought to be peculiar to the East, and
to be ultimately derived from the Jatakas or Birth Stories of the
Buddha who tells his adventures in former incarnations. Here we find
it in Celtdom, and it occurs also in "The Story-teller at Fault" in
this collection, and the story of _Koisha Kayn_ in MacInnes's
_Argyllshire Tales_, a variant of which, collected but not published
by Campbell, has no less than nineteen tales enclosed in a framework.
The question is whether the method was adopted independently in
Ireland, or was due to foreign influences. Confining ourselves to
"Conall Yellowclaw," it seems not unlikely that the whole story is an
importation. For the second episode is clearly the story of Polyphemus
from the Odyssey which was known in Ireland perhaps as early as the
tenth century (see Prof. K. Meyer's edition of _Merugud Uilix maic
Leirtis_, Pref. p. xii). It also crept into the voyages of Sindbad in
the _Arabian Nights_. And as told in the Highlands it bears comparison
even with the Homeric version. As Mr. Nutt remarks (_Celt. Mag._ xii.)
the address of the giant to the buck is as effective as that of
Polyphemus to his ram. The narrator, James Wilson, was a blind man who
would naturally feel the pathos of the address; "it comes from the
heart of the narrator;" says Campbell (_l. c._, 148), "it is the
ornament which his mind hangs on the frame of the story."

