VI. HUDDEN AND DUDDEN.

_Source._--From oral tradition, by the late D. W. Logie, taken down by
Mr. Alfred Nutt.

_Parallels._--Lover has a tale, "Little Fairly," obviously derived
from this folk-tale; and there is another very similar, "Darby Darly."
Another version of our tale is given under the title "Donald and his
Neighbours," in the chapbook _Hibernian Tales_, whence it was
reprinted by Thackeray in his _Irish Sketch-Book_, c., xvi. This has
the incident of the "accidental matricide," on which see Prof. R.
Köhler on Gonzenbach _Sicil. Märchen_, ii., 224. No less than four
tales of Campbell are of this type (_Pop. Tales_, ii., 218-31). M.
Cosquin in his _Contes populaires de Lorraine_, the storehouse of
"storiology," has elaborate excursuses in this class of tales attached
to his Nos. x. and xx. Mr. Clouston discusses it also in his _Pop.
Tales_, ii. 229-88. Both these writers are inclined to trace the chief
incidents to India. It is to be observed that one of the earliest
popular drolls in Europe, _Unibos_, a Latin poem of the eleventh, and
perhaps the tenth, century, has the main outlines of the story, the
fraudulent sale of worthless objects and the escape from the sack
trick. The same story occurs in Straparola, the European earliest
collection of folk-tales in the sixteenth century. On the other hand,
the gold sticking to the scales is familiar to us in _Ali Baba_.
(_Cf._ Cosquin, _l. c._, i., 225-6, 229).

_Remarks._--It is indeed curious to find, as M. Cosquin points out, a
cunning fellow tied in a sack getting out by crying, "I won't marry
the princess," in countries so far apart as Ireland, Sicily
(Gonzenbach, No. 71), Afghanistan (Thorburn, _Bannu_, p. 184), and
Jamaica (_Folk-Lore Record_, iii., 53). It is indeed impossible to
think these are disconnected, and for drolls of this kind a good case
has been made out for the borrowing hypotheses by M. Cosquin and Mr.
Clouston. Who borrowed from whom is another and more difficult
question which has to be judged on its merits in each individual case.

This is a type of Celtic folk-tales which are European in spread, have
analogies with the East, and can only be said to be Celtic by adoption
and by colouring. They form a distinct section of the tales told by
the Celts, and must be represented in any characteristic selection.
Other examples are xi., xv., xx., and perhaps xxii.

