VII. SHEPHERD OF MYDDVAI.

_Source._--Preface to the edition of "The Physicians of Myddvai;"
their prescription-book, from the Red Book of Hergest, published by
the Welsh MS. Society in 1861. The legend is not given in the Red
Book, but from oral tradition by Mr. W. Rees, p. xxi. As this is the
first of the Welsh tales in this book it may be as well to give the
reader such guidance as I can afford him on the intricacies of Welsh
pronunciation, especially with regard to the mysterious _w_'s and
_y_'s of Welsh orthography. For _w_ substitute double _o_, as in
"_fool_" and for _y_, the short _u_ in b_u_t, and as near approach to
Cymric speech will be reached as is possible for the outlander. It may
be added that double _d_ equals _th_, and double _l_ is something like
_Fl_, as Shakespeare knew in calling his Welsh soldier Fluellen
(Llewelyn). Thus "Meddygon Myddvai" would be _Anglicè_ "Methugon
Muthvai."

_Parallels._--Other versions of the legend of the Van Pool are given
in _Cambro-Briton_, ii., 315; W. Sikes, _British Goblins_, p. 40. Mr.
E. Sidney Hartland has discussed these and others in a set of papers
contributed to the first volume of _The Archæological Review_ (now
incorporated into _Folk-Lore_), the substance of which is now given in
his _Science of Fairy Tales_, 274-332. (See also the references given
in _Revue Celtique_, iv., 187 and 268). Mr. Hartland gives there an
ecumenical collection of parallels to the several incidents that go to
make up our story--(1) The bride-capture of the Swan-Maiden, (2) the
recognition of the bride, (3) the taboo against causeless blows, (4)
doomed to be broken, and (5) disappearance of the Swan-Maiden, with
(6) her return as Guardian Spirit to her descendants. In each case Mr.
Hartland gives what he considers to be the most primitive form of the
incident. With reference to our present tale, he comes to the
conclusion, if I understand him aright, that the lake-maiden was once
regarded as a local divinity. The physicians of Myddvai were historic
personages, renowned for their medical skill for some six centuries,
till the race died out with John Jones, _fl._ 1743. To explain their
skill and uncanny knowledge of herbs, the folk traced them to a
supernatural ancestress, who taught them their craft in a place still
called Pant-y-Meddygon ("Doctors' Dingle"). Their medical knowledge
did not require any such remarkable origin, as Mr. Hartland has shown
in a paper "On Welsh Folk-Medicine," contributed to _Y Cymmrodor_,
vol. xii. On the other hand, the Swan-Maiden type of story is
wide-spread through the Old World. Mr. Morris's "Land East of the Moon
and West of the Sun," in _The Earthly Paradise_, is taken from the
Norse version. Parallels are accumulated by the Grimms, ii., 432;
Köhler on Gonzenbach, ii., 20; or Blade, 149; Stokes's _Indian Fairy
Tales_, 243, 276; and Messrs. Jones and Koopf, _Magyar Folk-Tales_,
362-5. It remains to be proved that one of these versions did not
travel to Wales, and become there localised. We shall see other
instances of such localisation or specialisation of general legends.

