IX. DEIRDRE.

_Source._--_Celtic Magazine_, xiii., p. 69, _seq._ I have abridged
somewhat, made the sons of Fergus all faithful instead of two
traitors, and omitted an incident in the house of the wild men called
here "strangers." The original Gaelic was given in the _Transactions
of the Inverness Gaelic Society_ for 1887, p. 241, _seq._, by Mr.
Carmichael. I have inserted Deirdre's "Lament" from the _Book of
Leinster_.

_Parallels._--This is one of the three most sorrowful Tales of Erin,
(the other two, _Children of Lir_ and _Children of Tureen_, are given
in Dr. Joyce's _Old Celtic Romances_), and is a specimen of the old
heroic sagas of elopement, a list of which is given in the _Book of
Leinster_. The "outcast child" is a frequent episode in folk and
hero-tales: an instance occurs in my _English Fairy Tales_, No. xxxv.,
and Prof. Köhler gives many others in _Archiv f. Slav. Philologie_,
i., 288. Mr. Nutt adds tenth century Celtic parallels in _Folk-Lore_,
vol. ii. The wooing of hero by heroine is a characteristic Celtic
touch. See "Connla" here, and other examples given by Mr. Nutt in his
notes to MacInnes's _Tales_. The trees growing from the lovers' graves
occurs in the English ballad of _Lord Lovel_ and has been studied in
_Mélusine_.

_Remarks._--The "Story of Deirdre" is a remarkable instance of the
tenacity of oral tradition among the Celts. It has been preserved in
no less than five versions (or six, including Macpherson's
"Darthula") ranging from the twelfth to the nineteenth century. The
earliest is in the twelfth century, _Book of Leinster_, to be dated
about 1140 (edited in facsimile under the auspices of the Royal Irish
Academy, i., 147, _seq._). Then comes a fifteenth century version,
edited and translated by Dr. Stokes in Windisch's _Irische Texte_ II.,
ii., 109, _seq._, "Death of the Sons of Uisnech." Keating in his
_History of Ireland_ gave another version in the seventeenth century.
The Dublin Gaelic Society published an eighteenth century version in
their _Transactions_ for 1808. And lastly we have the version before
us, collected only a few years ago, yet agreeing in all essential
details with the version of the _Book of Leinster_. Such a record is
unique in the history of oral tradition, outside Ireland, where,
however, it is quite a customary experience in the study of the
Finn-saga. It is now recognised that Macpherson had, or could have
had, ample material for his _rechauffé_ of the Finn or "Fingal" saga.
His "Darthula" is a similar cobbling of our present story. I leave to
Celtic specialists the task of settling the exact relations of these
various texts. I content myself with pointing out the fact that in
these latter days of a seemingly prosaic century in these British
Isles there has been collected from the lips of the folk a heroic
story like this of "Deirdre," full of romantic incidents, told with
tender feeling and considerable literary skill. No other country in
Europe, except perhaps Russia, could provide a parallel to this living
on of Romance among the common folk. Surely it is a bounden duty of
those who are in a position to put on record any such utterances of
the folk-imagination of the Celts before it is too late.

