X. MUNACHAR AND MANACHAR.

_Source._--I have combined the Irish version given by Dr. Hyde in his
_Leabhar Sgeul._, and translated by him from Mr. Yeats's _Irish Folk
and Fairy Tales_, and the Scotch version given in Gaelic and English
by Campbell, No. viii.

_Parallels._--Two English versions are given in my _Eng. Fairy Tales_,
No. iv., "The Old Woman and her Pig," and xxxiv., "The Cat and the
Mouse," where see notes for other variants in these isles. M.
Cosquin, in his notes to No. xxxiv., of his _Contes de Lorraine_, t.
ii., pp. 35-41, has drawn attention to an astonishing number of
parallels scattered through all Europe and the East (_cf._, too,
Crane, _Ital. Pop. Tales_, notes. 372-5). One of the earliest
allusions to the jingle is in _Don Quixote_, pt. 1, c. xvi.: "Y asi
como suele decirse _el gato al rato, el rato á la cuerda, la cuerda al
palo_, daba el arriero á Sancho, Sancho á la moza, la moza a él, el
ventero á la moza." As I have pointed out, it is used to this day by
Bengali women at the end of each folk-tale they recite (L. B. Day,
_Folk-Tales of Bengal_, Pref.).

_Remarks._--Two ingenious suggestions have been made as to the origin
of this curious jingle, both connecting it with religious ceremonies:
(1) Something very similar occurs in Chaldaic at the end of the Jewish
_Hagada_, or domestic ritual for the Passover night. It has, however,
been shown that this does not occur in early MSS. or editions, and was
only added at the end to amuse the children after the service, and was
therefore only a translation or adaptation of a current German form of
the jingle; (2) M. Basset, in the _Revue des Traditions populaires_,
1890, t. v., p. 549, has suggested that it is a survival of the old
Greek custom at the sacrifice of the Bouphonia for the priest to
contend that _he_ had not slain the sacred beast, the axe declares
that the handle did it, the handle transfers the guilt further, and so
on. This is ingenious, but fails to give any reasonable account of the
diffusion of the jingle in countries which have had no historic
connection with classical Greece.


XI. GOLD-TREE AND SILVER-TREE.[1]

_Source._--_Celtic Magazine_, xiii. 213-8, Gaelic and English from Mr.
Kenneth Macleod.

_Parallels._--Mr. Macleod heard another version in which "Gold-tree"
(anonymous in this variant) is bewitched to kill her father's horse,
dog, and cock. Abroad it is the Grimms' _Schneewitchen_ (No. 53), for
the Continental variants of which see Köhler on Gonzenbach, _Sicil.
Märchen_, Nos. 2-4, Grimm's notes on 53, and Crane _Ital. Pop. Tales_,
331. No other version is known in the British Isles.

[Footnote 1: Since the first issue Mr. Nutt has made a remarkable
discovery with reference to this tale, which connects it with Marie de
France's _Lai d'Eliduc_ (c. 1200), and renders it probable that the
tale is originally Celtic. Mr. Nutt thinks that the German version may
be derived from England.]

_Remarks._--It is unlikely, I should say impossible, that this tale,
with the incident of the dormant heroine, should have arisen
independently in the Highlands: it is most likely an importation from
abroad. Yet in it occurs a most "primitive" incident, the bigamous
household of the hero: this is glossed over in Mr. Macleod's other
variant. On the "survival" method of investigation this would possibly
be used as evidence for polygamy in the Highlands. Yet if, as is
probable, the story came from abroad, this trait may have come with
it, and only implies polygamy in the original home of the tale.

