XIII. THE WOOING OF OLWEN.

_Source._--The _Mabinogi_ of Kilhwch and Olwen from the translation of
Lady Guest, abridged.

_Parallels._--Prof. Rhys, _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 486, considers that
our tale is paralleled by Cuchulain's "Wooing of Emer," a translation
of which by Prof. K. Meyer appeared in the _Archæological Review_,
vol. i. I fail to see much analogy. On the other hand in his
_Arthurian Legend_, p. 41, he rightly compares the tasks set by
Yspythadon to those set to Jason. They are indeed of the familiar type
of the Bride Wager (on which see Grimm-Hunt, i., 399). The incident of
the three animals, old, older, and oldest, has a remarkable
resemblance to the _Tettira Jataka_ (ed. Fausbôll, No. 37, transl.
Rhys-Davids, i., p. 310 _seq._) in which the partridge, monkey, and
elephant dispute as to their relative age, and the partridge turns out
to have voided the seed of the Banyan-tree under which they were
sheltered, whereas the elephant only knew it when a mere bush, and the
monkey had nibbled the topmost shoots. This apologue got to England at
the end of the twelfth century as the sixty-ninth fable, "Wolf, Fox,
and Dove," of a rhymed prose collection of "Fox Fables" (_Mishle
Shu'alim_), of an Oxford Jew, Berachyah Nakdan, known in the Records
as "Benedict le Puncteur" (see my _Fables of Æsop_, i., p. 170).
Similar incidents occur in "Jack and his Snuff-box" in my _English
Fairy Tales_, and in Dr. Hyde's "Well of D'Yerree-in-Dowan." The
skilled companions of Kulhwych are common in European folk-tales
(_Cf._ Cosquin, i., 123-5), and especially among the Celts (see Mr.
Nutt's note in MacInnes's _Tales_, 445-8), among whom they occur very
early, but not so early as Lynceus and the other skilled comrades of
the Argonauts.

_Remarks._--The hunting of the boar Trwyth can be traced back in Welsh
tradition at least as early as the ninth century. For it is referred
to in the following passage of Nennius's _Historia Britonum_, ed.
Stevenson, p. 60, "Est aliud miraculum in regione quæ dicitur Buelt
[Builth, co. Brecon] Est ibi cumulus lapidum et unus lapis
super-positus super congestum cum vestigia canis in eo. Quando venatus
est porcum Troynt [_var. lec._ Troit] impressit Cabal, qui erat canis
Arthuri militis, vestigium in lapide et Arthur postea congregavit
congestum lapidum sub lapide in quo erat vestigium canis sui et
vocatur Carn Cabal." Curiously enough there is still a mountain called
Carn Cabal in the district of Builth, south of Rhayader Gwy in
Breconshire. Still more curiously a friend of Lady Guest's found on
this a cairn with a stone two feet long by one foot wide in which
there was an indentation 4 in. x 3 in. x 2 in. which could easily have
been mistaken for a paw-print of a dog, as may be seen from the
engraving given of it on opposite page (_Mabinogion_, ed. 1874, p.
269).

The stone and the legend are thus at least one thousand years old.
"There stands the stone to tell if I lie." According to Prof. Rhys
(_Hibbert Lect._ 486-97) the whole story is a mythological one,
Kulhwych's mother being the dawn, the clover blossoms that grow under
Olwen's feet being comparable to the roses that sprang up where
Aphrodite had trod, and Yspyddadon being the incarnation of the
sacred hawthorn. Mabon, again (_l. c._ pp. 21, 28-9), is the Apollo
Maponus discovered in Latin inscriptions at Ainstable in Cumberland
and elsewhere (Hübner, _Corp. Insc. Lat. Brit._ Nos. 218, 332, 1345).
Granting all this, there is nothing to show any mythological
significance in the tale, though there may have been in the names of
the _dramatis personæ_. I observe from the proceedings of the recent
Eisteddfod that the bardic name of Mr. W. Abraham, M.P., is "Mabon."
It scarcely follows that Mr. Abraham is in receipt of divine honours
nowadays.

[Illustration:]

