XVII. SEA-MAIDEN.

_Source._--Campbell, _Pop. Tales_, No. 4. I have omitted the births of
the animal comrades and transposed the carlin to the middle of the
tale. Mr. Batten has considerately idealised the Sea-Maiden in his
frontispiece. When she restores the husband to the wife in one of the
variants, she brings him out of her mouth! "So the sea-maiden put up
his head (_Who do you mean? Out of her mouth to be sure. She had
swallowed him_)."

_Parallels._--The early part of the story occurs in No. xv., "Shee An
Gannon," and the last part in No. xix., "Fair, Brown, and Trembling"
(both from Curtin), Campbell's No. 1. "The Young King" is much like
it; also MacInnes's No. iv., "Herding of Cruachan" and No. viii., "Lod
the Farmer's Son." The third of Mr. Britten's Irish folk-tales in the
_Folk-Lore Journal_ is a Sea-Maiden story. The story is obviously a
favourite one among the Celts. Yet its main incidents occur with
frequency in Continental folk-tales. Prof. Köhler has collected a
number in his notes on Campbell's Tales in _Orient und Occident_, Bnd.
ii., 115-8. The trial of the sword occurs in the saga of Sigurd, yet
it is also frequent in Celtic saga and folk-tales (see Mr. Nutt's
note, MacInnes's _Tales_, 473, and add Curtin, 320). The hideous
carlin and her three giant sons is also common form in Celtic. The
external soul of the Sea-Maiden carried about in an egg, in a trout,
in a hoodie, in a hind, is a remarkable instance of a peculiarly
savage conception which has been studied by Major Temple, _Wide-awake
Stories_, 404-5; by Mr. E. Clodd, in the "Philosophy of Punchkin," in
_Folk-Lore Journal_, vol. ii., and by Mr. Frazer in his _Golden
Bough_, vol. ii.

_Remarks._--As both Prof. Rhys (_Hibbert Lect._, 464) and Mr. Nutt
(MacInnes's _Tales_, 477) have pointed out, practically the same story
(that of Perseus and Andromeda) is told of the Ultonian hero,
Cuchulain, in the _Wooing of Emer_, a tale which occurs in the Book of
Leinster, a MS. of the twelfth century, and was probably copied from
one of the eighth. Unfortunately, it is not complete, and the
Sea-Maiden incident is only to be found in a British Museum MS. of
about 1300. In this, Cuchulain finds that the daughter of Ruad is to
be given as a tribute to the Fomori, who, according to Prof. Rhys,
_Folk-Lore_, ii., 293, have something of the night_mare_ about their
etymology. Cuchulain fights _three_ of them successively, has his
wounds bound up by a strip of the maiden's garments, and then departs.
Thereafter many boasted of having slain the Fomori, but the maiden
believed them not till at last by a stratagem she recognises
Cuchulain. I may add to this that in Mr. Curtin's _Myths_, 330, the
threefold trial of the sword is told of Cuchulain. This would seem to
trace our story back to the seventh or eighth century and certainly to
the thirteenth. If so, it is likely enough that it spread from Ireland
through Europe with the Irish missions (for the wide extent of which
see map in Mrs. Bryant's _Celtic Ireland_). The very letters that have
spread through all Europe except Russia, are to be traced to the
script of these Irish monks; why not certain folk-tales? There is a
further question whether the story was originally told of Cuchulain as
a hero-tale and then became departicularised as a folk-tale, or was
the process _vice versâ_. Certainly in the form in which it appears in
the _Tochmarc Emer_ it is not complete, so that here, as elsewhere, we
seem to have an instance of a folk-tale applied to a well-known heroic
name, and becoming a hero-tale or saga.

