XXIV. BATTLE OF BIRDS.

_Source._--Campbell (_Pop. Tales, W. Highlands_, No. ii.), with
touches from the seventh variant and others, including the casket and
key finish, from Curtin's "Son of the King of Erin" (_Myths, &c., 32
seq._). I have also added a specimen of the humorous end pieces added
by Gaelic story-tellers; on these tags see an interesting note in
MacDougall's _Tales_, note on p. 112. I have found some difficulty in
dealing with Campbell's excessive use of the second person singular,
"If thou thouest him some two or three times, 'tis well," but beyond
that it is wearisome. Practically, I have reserved _thou_ for the
speech of giants, who may be supposed to be somewhat old-fashioned. I
fear, however, I have not been quite consistent, though the _You's_
addressed to the apple-pips are grammatically correct as applied to
the pair of lovers.

_Parallels._--Besides the eight versions given or abstracted by
Campbell and Mr. Curtin, there is Carleton's "Three Tasks," Dr. Hyde's
"Son of Branduf" (MS.); there is the First Tale of MacInnes (where see
Mr. Nutt's elaborate notes, 431-43), two in the _Celtic Magazine_,
vol. xii., "Grey Norris from Warland" (_Folk-Lore Journ._ i., 316),
and Mr. Lang's Morayshire Tale, "Nicht Nought Nothing" (see _Eng Fairy
Tales_, No. vii.), no less than sixteen variants found among the
Celts. It must have occurred early among them. Mr. Nutt found the
feather-thatch incident in the _Agallamh na Senoraib_ ("Discourse of
Elders"), which is at least as old as the fifteenth century. Yet the
story is to be found throughout the Indo-European world, as is shown
by Prof. Köhler's elaborate list of parallels attached to Mr. Lang's
variant in _Revue Celtique_, iii., 374; and Mr. Lang, in his _Custom
and Myth_ ("A far-travelled Tale"), has given a number of parallels
from savage sources. And strangest of all, the story is practically
the same as the classical myth of Jason and Medea.

_Remarks._--Mr. Nutt, in his discussion of the tale (MacInnes,
_Tales_, 441), makes the interesting suggestion that the obstacles to
pursuit, the forest, the mountain, and the river, exactly represent
the boundary of the old Teutonic Hades, so that the story was
originally one of the Descent to Hell. Altogether it seems likely that
it is one of the oldest folk-tales in existence, and belonged to the
story-store of the original Aryans, whoever they were, was passed by
them with their language on to the Hellenes and perhaps to the
Indians, was developed in its modern form in Scandinavia (where its
best representative "The Master-Maid" of Asbjörnsen is still found),
was passed by them to the Celts and possibly was transmitted by these
latter to other parts of Europe, perhaps by early Irish monks (see
notes on "Sea-Maiden"). The spread in the Buddhistic world, and
thence to the South Seas and Madagascar, would be secondary from
India. I hope to have another occasion for dealing with this most
interesting of all folk-tales in the detail it deserves.

