IV.

It has been suggested that the custom of the Sin-eater is in imitation
of the Biblical scapegoat. 'And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon
the head of the live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of
the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their
sins, putting them upon the head of the goat, and shall send him away
by the hand of a fit man into the wilderness. And the goat shall bear
upon him all their iniquities unto a land not inhabited: and he shall
let go the goat in the wilderness.'[149] This brings up the subject of
charms and magic, and is illustrated in Wales, if not by the
Sin-eater, by the cock and hen of St. Tegla's Well. This well is about
half-way between Wrexham and Ruthin, in the parish of Llandegla, and
has been considered efficacious in curing epilepsy. One of the common
names of that complaint in Welsh is Clwyf y Tegla, (Tegla's disease).
Relief is obtained by bathing in the well, and performing a
superstitious ceremony in this manner: The patient repairs to the well
after sunset, and washes himself in it; then, having made an offering
by throwing into the water fourpence, he walks round it three times,
and thrice recites the Lord's Prayer. If of the male sex, he offers a
cock; if a woman, a hen. The bird is carried in a basket, first round
the well, then round the church, and the rite of repeating the Pater
Noster again performed. After all this, he enters the church, creeps
under the altar, and making the Bible his pillow and the communion
cloth his coverlet, remains there until the break of day. In the
morning, having made a further offering of sixpence, he leaves the
cock (or hen, as the case may be) and departs. 'Should the bird die,
it is supposed that the disease has been transferred to it, and the
man or woman consequently cured.'[150] The custom is associated with
the ancient Druids as well as with the Jews, and its resemblance to
the scapegoat is suggestive.
