VI.

The legend of the Grassless Grave is a well-known Montgomeryshire
tale, concerning a certain spot of earth in the graveyard of
Montgomery Castle, upon which the verdure is less luxuriant than in
other portions of the yard. One dark November night, many years ago,
a man named John Newton, who had been at Welshpool fair, set out for
home. Soon after, he was brought back to Welshpool in the custody of
two men, who charged him with highway robbery, a crime then punishable
with death. He was tried, and executed, in spite of his protestations;
and in his last speech, admitting he had committed a former crime, but
protesting he was innocent of this, he said: 'I have offered a prayer
to Heaven, and believe it has been heard and accepted. And in meek
dependence on a merciful God, whom I have offended, but who, through
the atonement of His blessed Son, has, I trust, pardoned my offence, I
venture to assert that as I am innocent of the crime for which I
suffer, the grass, for one generation at least, will not cover my
grave.' For thirty years thereafter, the grave was grassless; a bare
spot in the shape of a coffin marked, amidst the surrounding
luxuriance, the place where lay the penitent criminal, unjustly
executed. Then a sacrilegious hand planted the spot with turf; but it
withered as if blasted by lightning; and the grave is still
grassless--certainly an unnecessary extension of the time set by the
defunct for its testimony to his innocence.

