IX.

Sul Coffa is an old Welsh custom of honouring the dead on the Sunday
following the funeral, and for several succeeding Sundays, until the
violence of grief has abated. In the Journal of Thomas Dinelly,
Esquire, an Englishman who travelled through Wales and Ireland in the
reign of Charles II.,[156] this passage occurs, after description of
the wake, the keening, etc.: 'This done y{e} Irish bury their dead,
and if it be in or neer y{e} burying place of that family, the
servants and followers hugg kiss howle and weep over the skulls that
are there digg'd up and once a week for a quarter of an year after
come two or three and pay more noyse at the place.' The similarity in
spirit between this and the Welsh Sul Coffa is as striking as the
difference in practice. The Welsh walk quietly and gravely to the
solemn mound beneath which rest the remains of the loved, and there
kneeling in silence for five or ten minutes, pray or appear to pray.

The Sul Coffa of Ivan the Harper is a well-known anecdote. Ivan the
Harper was a noted character in his day, who desired that his coffa
should be thus: 'I should like,' said he, on his death-bed, 'to have
my coffa; but not in the old style. Instead of the old custom ask
Williams of Merllyn and Richard the Harper to attend the church at
Llanfwrog, and give these, my disciples, my two harps, and after the
service is over, let them walk to my grave; let Williams sit at the
head and Richard at the feet, of my grave, and let them play seven
Welsh airs, beginning with Dafydd y Garreg Wen,' (David of the White
Stone) 'and ending with, Toriad y Dydd,' (the Dawn.) 'The former is in
a flat key, like death, and the latter is as sober as the day of
judgment.' This request was religiously obeyed by the mourners on the
ensuing Sul Coffa.

FOOTNOTE:

[156] Quoted in the Proceedings of the Kilkenny Arch. Soc., 1858.

