II.

There was anciently a belief that the sound of brass would break
enchantment, as well as cause it; and it is presumed that the original
purpose of the common custom of tolling the bell for the dead was to
drive away evil spirits. Originally, the bell was tolled not for the
dead, but for the dying; it was believed that evil spirits were
hovering about the sick chamber, waiting to pounce on the soul as soon
as it should get free from the body; and the bell was tolled for the
purpose of driving them away. Later, the bell was not tolled till
death had occurred, and this form of the custom survives here, as in
many lands. Before the Reformation there was kept in all Welsh
churches a handbell, which was taken by the sexton to the house where
a funeral was to be held, and rung at the head of the procession. When
the voices of the singers were silent at the end of a psalm, the bell
would take up the burden of complaint in measured and mournful tones,
and ring till another psalm was begun. It was at this period deemed
sacred. The custom survived long after the Reformation in many places,
as at Caerleon, the little Monmouthshire village which was a bustling
Roman city when London was a hamlet. The bell--called the bangu--was
still preserved in the parish of Llanfair Duffryn Clwyd half-a-dozen
years ago. I believe the custom of ringing a handbell before the
corpse on its way through the streets is still observed at Oxford,
when a university man is buried. The town marshal is the bellman for
this office. The custom is associated with the same superstitious
belief which is seen in the 'passing bell,' the notes of pure bronze
freeing the soul from the power of evil spirits.

