V.

The bell of St. Illtyd was greatly venerated in the middle ages. A
legend concerning this wonderful bell relates that a certain king had
stolen it from the church, and borne it into England, tied about the
neck of one of his horses. For this deed the king was destroyed, but
repenting before his death, ordered the bell to be restored to its
place in Wales. Without waiting to be driven, the horse with the bell
about his neck set out for Wales, followed by a whole drove of horses,
drawn by the melodious sound of the bell. Wonderful to tell, the horse
was able to cross the river Severn and come into Wales, the great
collection of horses following. 'Then hastening along the shore, and
over the mountains, and through the woods, he came to the road which
went towards Glamorgan, all the horses hearing, and following the
sweet sound.' When they came to the banks of the river Taff, a
clergyman heard the sound of the bell, and went out to meet the horse,
and they together carried the bell to the gate of St. Illtyd's church.
There the horse bent down and loosed his precious burden from his
neck, 'and it fell on a stone, from which fall a part of it was
broken, which is to be seen until the present day, in memory of the
eminent miracle.'[159]

Some thirty years ago a bell was discovered at Llantwit Major, in
Glamorganshire, which was thought to be the identical bell of this
saint. The village named was the scene of his exploits, many of which
were miraculous to the point of Arabian Nights marvelousness. The
discovered bell was inscribed 'Sancte Iltute, ora pro nobis,' and
stood upon the gable of the quaint old town-hall. But though the bell
was unmistakably ancient, it bore intrinsic evidence of having been
cast long after the saint's death, when his name had become venerated.
He was one of King Arthur's soldiers, who afterwards renounced the
world, and founded several churches in Glamorganshire.

FOOTNOTE:

[159] 'Cambro-British Saints,' 492.

