II.

Most renowned and most frequented of Welsh wells is St. Winifred's, at
Holywell. By the testimony of tradition it has been flowing for eleven
hundred and eighty years, or since the year 700, and during all this
time has been constantly visited by throngs of invalids; and that it
will continue to be so frequented for a thousand years to come is not
doubted, apparently, by the members of the Holywell Local Board, who
have just taken a lease of the well from the Duke of Westminster for
999 years more, at an annual rental of Â£1. The town of Holywell
probably owes not only name but existence to this well. Its miraculous
powers are extensively believed in by the Welsh, and by people from
all parts of Great Britain and the United States; but Drayton's
assertion that no dog could be drowned in its waters, on account of
their beneficent disposition, is not an article of the existing faith.
The most prodigious fact in connection with this wonderful fountain,
when its legendary origin is contemplated, is its size, its abounding
life, the great volume of its waters. A well which discharges
twenty-one tons of water per minute, which feeds an artificial lake
and runs a mill, and has cured unnumbered thousands of human beings of
their ills for hundreds of years, is surely one of the wonders of the
world, to which even mystic legend can only add one marvel more.

The legend of St. Winifred, or Gwenfrewi, as she is called in Welsh,
was related by the British monk Elerius in the year 660, or by Robert
of Salop in 1190, and is in the Cotton MSS. in the British Museum. It
is there written in characters considered to be of the middle of the
eleventh century. Winifred was the daughter of a valiant soldier in
North Wales; from her youth she loved a heavenly spouse, and refused
transitory men. One day Caradoc, a descendant of royal stock, came to
her house fatigued from hunting wild beasts, and asked Winifred for
drink. But seeing the beauty of the nymph he forgot his thirst in his
admiration, and at once besought her to treat him with the familiarity
of a sweetheart. Winifred refused, asserting that she was engaged to
be married to another. Caradoc became furious at this, and said,
'Leave off this foolish, frivolous, and trifling mode of speaking, and
consent to my wish.' Then he asked her to be his wife. Finding he
would not be denied, Winifred had recourse to a stratagem to escape
from him: she pretended to comply, but asked leave to first make a
becoming toilet. Caradoc agreed, on condition that she should make it
quickly. The girl went through her chamber with swift feet into the
valley, and was escaping, when Caradoc perceived the trick, and
mounting his horse spurred after her. He overtook her at the very door
of the monastery to which she was fleeing; before she could place her
foot within the threshold he struck off her head at one blow. St.
Beino coming quickly to the door saw bloody Caradoc standing with his
stained sword in his hand, and immediately cursed him as he stood, so
that the bloody man melted in his sight like wax before a fire. Beino
then took the virgin's head (which had been thrown inside the door by
the blow which severed it) and fitted it on the neck of the corpse.
Winifred thereupon revived, with no further harm than a small line on
her neck. But the floor upon which her bloody head had fallen, cracked
open, and a fountain sprang up like a torrent at the spot. 'And the
stones appear bloody at present as they did at first, and the moss
smells as frankincense, and it cures divers diseases.'[161] Thus far
the monastic legend. Some say that Caradoc's descendants were doomed
to bark like dogs.

Among the miracles related of Winifred's well by her monkish
biographer is one characterized as 'stupendous,' concerning three
bright stones which were seen in the middle of the ebullition of the
fountain, ascending and descending, 'up and down by turns, after the
manner of stones projected by a shooter.' They so continued to dance
for many years, but one day an unlucky woman was seized with a desire
to play with the stones. So she took hold of one; whereat they all
vanished, and the woman died. This miracle was supplemented by that of
a man who was rebuked for theft at the fountain; and on his denying
his guilt, the goat which he had stolen and eaten became his accuser
by uttering an audible bleating from his belly. But the miracles of
Winifred's well are for the most part records of wonderful cures from
disease and deformity. Withered and useless limbs were made whole and
useful; the dumb bathed in the water, came out, and asked for their
clothes; the blind washed and received their sight; lunatics 'troubled
by unclean spirits' were brought to the well in chains, 'tearing with
their teeth and speaking vain things,' but returned homeward in full
possession of their reason. Fevers, paralysis, epilepsy, stone, gout,
cancers, piles--these are but a few of the diseases cured by the
marvellous well, on the testimony of the ancient chronicler of the
Cotton MSS. 'Nor is it to be hidden in the silence of Lethean oblivion
that after the expulsion of the Franks from all North Wales' the
fountain flowed with a milky liquor for the space of three days. A
priest bottled some of it, and it 'was carried about and drunk in all
directions,' curing diseases in the same manner as the well itself.

FOOTNOTE:

[161] 'Cambro-British Saints,' 519.

