VI.

St. Cynhafal's well, on a hillside in Llangynhafal parish,
Denbighshire, is one of those curing wells in which pins are thrown.
Its specialty is warts. To exorcise your wart you stick a pin in it
and then throw the pin into this well; the wart soon vanishes. The
wart is a form of human trouble which appears to have been at all
times and in all countries a special subject of charms, both in
connection with wells and with pins. Where a well of the requisite
virtue is not conveniently near, the favourite form of charm for
wart-curing is in connection with the wasting away of some selected
object. Having first been pricked into the wart, the pin is then
thrust into the selected object--in Gloucestershire it is a snail--and
then the object is buried or impaled on a blackthorn in a hedge, and
as it perishes the wart will disappear. The scapegoat principle of
the sin-eater also appears in connection with charming away warts, as
where a 'vagrom man' counts your warts, marks their number in his hat,
and goes away, taking the warts with him into the next county--for a
trifling consideration.[163]

FOOTNOTE:

[163] A popular belief among boys in some parts of the United States
is that warts can be rubbed off upon a toad impaled with a sharp
stick; as the toad dies the warts will go. _Per contra_, this cruel
faith is offset by a theory that toads if ill-treated can spit upon
their aggressors' hands and thus cause warts.

