IX.

The use of pins for purposes of enchantment is one of the most curious
features of popular superstition. Trivial as it appears to superficial
observation, it can be associated with a vast number of mystic rites
and ceremonials, and with times the most ancient. There is no doubt
that before the invention of pins in this country small pieces of
money were thrown into the well instead; indeed it was asserted by a
writer in the 'Arch√¶ologia Cambrensis' in 1856 that money was still
thrown into St. Tecla's well, by persons desirous of recovering from
fits. That the same practice prevailed among the Romans is shown by
Pliny, who speaks of the sacred spring of the Clitumnus, so pure and
clear that you may count the pieces of money that have been thrown
into it, and the shining pebbles at the bottom. And in connection with
the Welsh well of St. Elian there was formerly a box into which the
sick dropped money as they nowadays drop a pin into that well. This
box was called cyff-elian, and was in the form of a trunk studded with
nails, with an aperture in the top through which the money was
dropped. It is said to have got so full of coins that the parishioners
opened it, and with the contents purchased three farms. The
presentation of pins to the well, though now a meaningless rite on the
part of those who practice it, was originally intended as a
propitiatory offering to the evil spirit of the well. In some
instances the heathen faith is virtually restored, and the well
endowed with supernatural powers irrespective of the dedication of its
waters to a Christian saint. Indeed in the majority of cases where
these wells are now resorted to by the peasantry for any other than
curative purposes, the fetichistic impulse is much more conspicuous
than any influence associated with religious teaching.

