X.

St. Elian's is accounted the most dreadful well in Wales. It is in the
parish of Llanelian, Denbighshire. It is at the head of the cursing
wells, of which there are but few in the Principality, and holds still
a strong influence over the ignorant mind. The popular belief is that
you can 'put' your enemy 'into' this well, i.e., render him subject to
its evil influence, so that he will pine away and perhaps die unless
the curse be removed. The degree and nature of the curse can be
modified as the 'offerer' desires, so that the obnoxious person will
suffer aches and pains in his body, or troubles in his pocket--the
slings and arrows of outrageous fortune. The minister of the well
appears to be some heartless wretch residing in the neighbourhood,
whose services are enlisted for a small fee. The name of the person to
be 'put into' the well is registered in a book kept by the wretch
aforesaid, and a pin is cast into the well in his name, together with
a pebble inscribed with its initials. The person so cursed soon hears
of it, and the fact preys on his mind; he imagines for himself every
conceivable ill, and if gifted with a lively faith soon finds himself
reduced to a condition where he cannot rest till he has secured the
removal of the curse. This is effected by a reversal of the above
ceremonies--erasing the name, taking out the pebble, and otherwise
appeasing the spirit of the well. It is asserted that death has in
many instances resulted from the curse of this wickedly malicious
well.[167]

FOOTNOTE:

[167] 'Camb. Pop. Ant.,' 247. See also 'Arch. Camb.,' 1st Se., i. 46.

