XIII.

Some of the Welsh mystic wells are so situated that they are at times
overflowed by the waters of the sea, or of a river. Taff's Well, in
Glamorganshire, a pleasant walk from Cardiff, is situated practically
in the bed of the river Taff. One must wade through running water to
reach it, except in the summer season, when the water in the river is
very low. A rude hut of sheet iron has been built over it. This well
is still noted for its merits in healing rheumatism and kindred
ailments. The usual stories are told of miraculous cures. A primitive
custom of the place is that when men are bathing at this well they
shall hang a pair of trousers outside the hut; women, in their turn,
must hang out a petticoat or bonnet.

At Newton Nottage, Glamorganshire, a holy well called Sanford's is so
situated that the water is regulated in the well by the ocean tides.
From time immemorial wondrous tales have been told of this well, how
it ebbs and flows daily in direct contrariety to the tidal ebb and
flow. The bottom of the well is below high-water mark on the beach,
where it has an outlet into the sea. At very low tides in the summer,
when the supply of water in the well is scanty, it becomes dry for an
hour or two after low water. When the ocean tide rises, the sea-water
banks up and drives back the fresh water, and the well fills again and
its water rises. The villagers are accustomed to let the well-water
rise through what they call the 'nostrils of the well,' and become
settled a little before they draw it. Of course this phenomenon has
been regarded as something supernatural by the ignorant for ages, and
upon the actual visible phenomena have been built a number of magical
details of a superstitious character.

