I.

In the traditions concerning Welsh stones, abundant personal
attributes are accorded them, such as in nature belong only to
animals. They were endowed with volition and with voice; they could
travel from place to place without mortal aid; they would move
uneasily when disturbed by human contact; they expanded and contracted
at will; they clung to people who touched them with profane or guilty
purpose; they possessed divers qualities which made them valuable to
their possessors, such as the power of rendering them invisible, or of
filling their pockets with gold. In pursuing the various accounts of
these stones in Welsh folk-lore we find ourselves now in fairyland,
now in the domains of mother church, now listening to legends of
enchantment, now to tales of saintly virtue, now giving ear to a
magician, now to a monk. Stone-worship, of which the existing
superstitions are remains, was so prevalent under the Saxon monarchy,
that it was forbidden by law in the reign of Edgar the Peaceable,
(ninth century,) and when Canute came, in the following century, he
also found it advisable to issue such a law. That this pagan worship
was practised from a time of which there is now no record, is not
questioned; and the perpetuation of certain features of this worship
by the early Christians was in spite of the laws promulgated for its
suppression by a Christian king. In this manner the monks were enabled
to draw to themselves the peasantry in whose breasts the ancient
superstition was strong, and who willingly substituted the new story
for the old, so long as the underlying belief was not rudely uprooted.

