VIII.

Upon this hint there opens out before the inquirer a wealth of
incident and illustration, in connection with gigantic Britons of old
time who hurled huge rocks about as pebbles. There is the story of the
giant Idris, who dwelt upon Cader Idris, and who found no less a
number than three troublesome pebbles in his shoe as he was out
walking one day, and who tossed them down where they lie on the road
from Dolgelley to Machynlleth, three bulky crags. There are several
legends about Mol Walbec's pebbles in Breconshire. This lusty dame has
a full score of shadowy castles on sundry heights in that part of
Wales; and she is said to have built the castle of Hay in one night.
In performing this work she carried the stones in her apron; one of
these--a pebble about a foot thick and nine feet long--fell into her
shoe. At first she did not notice it, but by-and-by it began to annoy
her, and she plucked it out and threw it into Llowes churchyard, three
miles away, where it now lies. In many parts of Wales where lie rude
heaps of stones, the peasantry say they were carried there by a witch
in her apron.

The gigantic creatures whose dimensions are indicated by these stones
reappear continually in Welsh folk-lore. Arthur is merely the greatest
among them; all were of prodigious proportions. Hu Gadarn, Cadwaladr,
Rhitta Gawr, Brutus, Idris, are all members of the shadowy race whose
'quoits' and 'pebbles' are scattered about Wales. The remains at
Stonehenge have been from time immemorial called by the Cymry the CÃ´r
Gawr, Circle or Dance of Giants. How the Carmarthen enchanter, Merlin,
transported these stones hither from Killara mountain in Ireland by
his magic art, everybody knows. It is only necessary that a stone
should be of a size to make the idea of removing it an apparently
hopeless one--that Merlin or some other magician brought it there by
enchantment, or that Arthur or some other giant tossed it there with
his mighty arm, is a matter of course.[177] The giant of Trichrug, (a
fairy haunt in Cardiganshire,) appears to have been the champion
pebble-tosser of Wales, if local legend may be trusted. Having invited
the neighbouring giants to try their strength with him in throwing
stones, he won the victory by tossing a huge rock across the sea into
Ireland. His grave is traditionally reported to be on that mountain,
and to possess the same properties as the Expanding Stone, for it fits
any person who lies down in it, be he tall or short. It has the
further virtue of imparting extraordinary strength to any one lying in
it; but if he gets into it with arms upon his person they will be
taken from him and he will never see them more.

FOOTNOTE:

[177] It is noteworthy that most of the great stones of these legends
appear to have really been transported to the place where they are now
found, being often of a different rock than that of the immediate
locality. To what extent the legends express the first vague
inductions of early geological observers, is a question not without
interest.

