IV.

Our old friend the devil is once more to the fore when we encounter
the inscribed stone of the twelfth century, which stands in the
churchyard of Llanarth, near Aberaeron, in Cardiganshire. A cross
covers this stone, with four circular holes at the junction of the
arms. The current tradition of the place regarding it is that one
stormy night, there was such a tremendous noise heard in the belfry
that the whole village was thrown into consternation. It was finally
concluded that nobody but the diawl could be the cause of this, and
therefore the people fetched his reverence from the vicarage to go and
request the intruder to depart. The vicar went up into the belfry,
with bell, book, and candle, along the narrow winding stone staircase,
and, as was anticipated, there among the bells he saw the devil in
person. The good man began the usual 'Conjurate in nomine,' etc., when
the fiend sprang up and mounted upon the leads of the tower. The vicar
was not to be balked, however, and boldly followed up the remainder of
the staircase and got also out upon the leads. The devil finding
himself hard pressed, had nothing for it but to jump over the
battlements of the tower. He came down plump among the gravestones
below, and falling upon one, made with his hands and knees the four
holes now visible on the stone in question, which among the country
people still bears the name of the Devil's Stone.

