V.

The logan stones in various parts of Wales, which vibrate mysteriously
under the touch of a child's finger, and rock violently at a push from
a man's stronger hand, are also considered by the superstitious a
favourite resort of the fairies and the diawl. The holy aerolite to
which unnumbered multitudes bow down at Mecca is indeed no stranger
thing than the rocking-stone on Pontypridd's sky-perched common. Among
the marvellous stones in Nennius is one concerning a certain altar in
Loin-Garth, in Gower, 'suspended by the power of God,' which he says a
legend tells us was brought thither in a ship along with the dead body
of some holy man who desired to be buried near St. Illtyd's grave, and
to remain unknown by name, lest he should become an object of too
reverent regard; for Illtyd dwelt in a cave there, the mouth of which
faced the sea in those days; and having received this charge, he
buried the corpse, and built a church over it, enclosing the wonderful
altar, which testified by more than one astounding miracle the Divine
power which sustained it. This is thought to be a myth relating to
some Welsh rocking-stone no longer known. The temptation to throw down
stones of this character has often been too much for the
destruction-loving vulgarian, both in Wales and in other parts of the
British islands; but the offenders have seldom been the local
peasantry, who believe that the guardians of the stone--the fairies or
the diawl, as the case may be--will heavily avenge its overthrow on
the overthrowers.

