IX.

A very great number of fanciful legends might be related in connection
with stones of striking shape, or upon which there are peculiar marks
and figures; but enough of this store of folk-lore has been given to
serve present ends. If more were detailed, there would in all cases be
found a family resemblance to the legends which have been presented,
and which lead us now into the enchanted country where Arthur reigns,
now wandering among the monkish records of church and abbey, now to
the company of the dwarfs and giants of fairyland. That the British
Druids regarded many of these stones with idolatrous reverence, is
most probable. Some of them, as the cromlechs and logans, they no
doubt employed in their mystic rites, as being symbols of the dimly
descried Power they worshipped. Of their extreme antiquity there is no
question. The rocking-stones may be considered natural objects, though
they were perhaps assisted to their remarkable poise by human hands.
The cromlechs were originally sepulchral chambers, unquestionably, but
they are so old that neither history nor tradition gives any aid in
assigning the date of their erection. Opinions that they were once
pulpits of sun-worship, or Druidic altars of sacrifice, are not
unwarranted, perhaps, though necessarily conjectural. The evidence
that the inscribed stones are simply funeral monuments, is extensive
and conclusive. Originally erected in honour of some great chief or
warrior, they were venerated by the people, and became shrines about
which the latter gathered in a spirit of devotion. With the lapse of
ages, the warrior was forgotten; even the language in which he was
commemorated decayed, and the marks on the stones became to the
peasantry meaningless hieroglyphics, to which was given a mysterious
and awful significance; and so for unnumbered centuries the tombstone
remained an object of superstitious fear and veneration.



