II.

Crumlyn Lake, near the quaint village of Briton Ferry, is one of the
many in Wales which are a resort of the elfin dames. It is also
believed that a large town lies swallowed up there, and that the
Gwragedd Annwn have turned the submerged walls to use as the
superstructure of their fairy palaces. Some claim to have seen the
towers of beautiful castles lifting their battlements beneath the
surface of the dark waters, and fairy bells are at times heard ringing
from these towers. The way the elfin dames first came to dwell there
was this: A long, ay, a very long time ago, St. Patrick came over from
Ireland on a visit to St. David of Wales, just to say 'Sut yr y'ch
chwi?' (How d'ye do?); and as they were strolling by this lake
conversing on religious topics in a friendly manner, some Welsh people
who had ascertained that it was St. Patrick, and being angry at him
for leaving Cambria for Erin, began to abuse him in the Welsh
language, his native tongue. Of course such an insult could not go
unpunished, and St. Patrick caused his villifiers to be transformed
into fishes; but some of them being females, were converted into
fairies instead. It is also related that the sun, on account of this
insolence to so holy a man, never shed its life-giving rays upon the
dark waters of this picturesque lake, except during one week of the
year. This legend and these magical details are equally well
accredited to various other lakes, among them Llyn Barfog, near
Aberdovey, the town whose 'bells' are celebrated in immortal song.

