VII.

The didactic purpose again appears in the following legend, which,
varying but little in phraseology, is current in the neighbourhood of
a dozen different mountain lakes: In other days, before the Cymry had
become reconciled to their Saxon foe, on every New Year's morning a
door was found open in a rock hard by the lake. Those mortals who had
the curiosity and the resolution to enter this door were conducted by
a secret passage to a small island in the middle of the lake. Here
they found a most enchanting garden, stored with the choicest fruits
and flowers, and inhabited by the Gwragedd Annwn, whose beauty could
be equalled only by the courtesy and affability which they exhibited
to those who pleased them. They gathered fruit and flowers for each of
their guests, entertained them with the most exquisite music,
disclosed to them many secrets of futurity, and invited them to stay
as long as they liked. 'But,' said they, 'the island is secret, and
nothing of its produce must be carried away.' The warning being
heeded, all went well. But one day there appeared among the visitors a
wicked Welshman, who, thinking to derive some magical aid therefrom,
pocketed a flower with which he had been presented, and was about to
leave the garden with his prize. But the theft boded him no good. As
soon as he had touched unhallowed ground the flower vanished, and he
lost his senses. However, of this abuse of their hospitality the
Gwragedd Annwn took no notice at the time. They dismissed their guests
with their accustomed courtesy, and the door was closed as usual. But
their resentment was bitter; for though the fairies of the lake and
their enchanted garden undoubtedly occupy the spot to this day, the
door which led to the island has never been reopened.

