II.

Another account relates that John ap John, of Cwm Celyn, set out one
morning before daybreak to walk to Caerleon Fair. As he ascended
Milfre Mountain he heard a shouting behind him as if it were on Bryn
Mawr, which is a part of the Black Mountain in Breconshire. Soon after
he heard the shouting on his left hand, at Bwlch y Llwyn, nearer to
him, whereupon he was seized with a great fright, and began to suspect
it was no human voice. He had already been wondering, indeed, what any
one could be doing at that hour in the morning, shouting on the
mountain side. Still going on, he came up higher on the mountain, when
he heard the shouting just before him, at Gilfach fields, to the
right--and now he was sure it was the Old Woman of the Mountain, who
purposed leading him astray. Presently he heard behind him the noise
of a coach, and with it the special cry of the Old Woman of the
Mountain, viz., 'Wow up!' Knowing very well that no coach could go
that way, and still hearing its noise approaching nearer and nearer,
he became thoroughly terrified, and running out of the road threw
himself down upon the ground and buried his face in the heath,
waiting for the phantom to pass. When it was gone out of hearing, he
arose; and hearing the birds singing as the day began to break, also
seeing some sheep before him, his fear went quite off. And this, says
the Prophet Jones, was 'no profane, immoral man,' but 'an honest,
peaceable, knowing man, and a very comely person' moreover.

