III.

An old man who died in St. Dogmell's parish, Pembrokeshire, a short
time since (viz., in 1860), nearly a hundred years old, used to say
that that whole neighbourhood was considered 'fou.' It was a common
experience for men to be led astray there all night, and after
marvellous adventures and untellable trampings, which seemed as if
they would be endless, to find when day broke that they were close to
their own homes. In one case, a man who was led astray chanced to have
with him a number of hoop-rods, and as he wandered about under the
influence of the deluding phantom, he was clever enough to drop the
rods one by one, so that next day he might trace his journeyings. When
daylight came, and the search for the hoop-rods was entered on, it was
found they were scattered over miles upon miles of country. Another
time, a St. Dogmell's fisherman was returning home from a wedding at
Moelgrove, and it being very dark, the fairies led him astray, but
after a few hours he had the good luck (which Sir John Franklin might
have envied him) to 'discover the North Pole,' and by this beacon he
was able to steer his staggering barque to the safe port of his own
threshold. It is even gravely stated that a severe and dignified
clerical person, no longer in the frisky time of life, but advanced in
years, was one night forced to join in the magic dance of St.
Dogmell's, and keep it up till nearly daybreak. Specific details in
this instance are wanting; but it was no doubt the Ellyllon who led
all these folk astray, and put a cap of oblivion on their heads, which
prevented them from ever telling their adventures clearly.

