III.

A common means of getting rid of the fairies is to change one's place
of residence; the fair folk will not abide in a house which passes
into new hands. A story is told of a Merionethshire farmer who, being
tormented beyond endurance by a Bwbach of a mischievous turn,
reluctantly resolved to flit. But first consulting a wise woman at
Dolgelley, he was advised to make a pretended flitting, which would
have the same effect; he need only give out that he was going to move
over the border into England, and then get together his cattle and his
household goods, and set out for a day's drive around the Arenig. The
fairy would surely quit the house when the farmer should quit it, and
especially would it quit the premises of a born Cymro who avowed his
purpose of settling in the foreign land of the Sais. So then he could
come back to his house by another route, and he would find the
obnoxious Bwbach gone. The farmer did as he was told, and set out upon
his journey, driving his cattle and sheep before him, and leading the
cart upon which his furniture was piled, while his wife and children
trudged behind. When he reached Rhyd-y-Fen, a ford so called from this
legend, they met a neighbour, who exclaimed, 'Holo, Dewi, are you
leaving us for good?' Before the farmer could answer there was a
shrill cry from inside the churn on the cart, 'Yes, yes, we are
flitting from Hendrefawr to Eingl-dud, where we've got a new home.' It
was the Bwbach that spoke. He was flitting with the household goods,
and the farmer's little plan to be rid of him was a complete failure.
The good man sighed as he turned his horses about and went back to
Hendrefawr by the same road he had come.

