VI.

The thought will naturally occur that by fostering belief in such
tales as some of the foregoing, roguery might make the superstition
useful in silencing inquiry as to ill-gotten gains. But on the other
hand the virtues of hospitality and generosity were no doubt fostered
by the same influences. If any one was favoured by the fairies in this
manner, the immediate explanation was, that he had done a good turn to
them, generally without suspecting who they were. The virtues of
neatness, in young girls and servants, were encouraged by the like
notions; the belief that a fairy will leave money only on a clean-kept
hob, could tend to nothing more directly. It was also made a condition
of pleasing the Tylwyth Teg that the hearth should be carefully swept
and the pails left full of water. Then the fairies would come at
midnight, continue their revels till daybreak, sing the well-known
strain of 'Toriad y Dydd,' or 'The Dawn,' leave a piece of money on
the hob, and disappear. Here is seen a precaution against fire in the
clean-swept hearth and the provision of filled water-pails. That the
promised reward did not always arrive, was not evidence it would never
arrive; and so the virtue of perseverance was also fostered.

Superstitions of this class are widely prevalent among Aryan peoples.
The 'Arabian Nights' story of the old rogue whose money turned to
leaves will be recalled. In Danish folk-lore, the fairy money bestowed
on the boors turns sometimes to pebbles, and sometimes grows hot and
burns their fingers, so that they drop it, when it sinks into the
earth.

  [Music: TORIAD Y DYDD.]



