VIII.

The laws governing the Welsh spirit-world are clear and explicit. A
ghost on duty bent has no power of speech until first spoken to. Its
persistency in haunting is due to its eager desire to speak, and tell
its urgent errand, but the person haunted must take his courage in
both hands and put the question to the issue. Having done so, he is
booked for the end of the business, be it what it may. The mode of
speech adopted must not vary, in addressing a spirit; in the name of
the Father, Son, or Holy Ghost it must be addressed, and not
otherwise. Its business must be demanded; three times the question
must be repeated, unless the ghost answer earlier. When it answers, it
speaks in a low and hollow voice, stating its desire; and it must not
be interrupted while speaking, for to interrupt it is dangerous in the
extreme. At the close of its remarks, questions are in order. They
must be promptly delivered, however, or the ghost will vanish. They
must bear on the business in hand: it is offended if asked as to its
state, or other idle questions born of curiosity. Neglect to obey the
ghost's injunctions will lead to much annoyance, and eventually to
dire results. At first the spirit will appear with a discontented
visage, next with an angry one, and finally with a countenance
distorted with the most ferocious rage. Obedience is the only method
of escape from its revenge. Such is a _resum√©_ of the laws. The
illustrations thereof are generally consistent in their details.

The story of Cadogan's ghost is one of many in kind. Thomas Cadogan
was the owner of a large estate in the parish of Llanvihangel
Llantarnam, and being a covetous man did wickedly remove his landmarks
in such a way as to absorb to himself part of the land of a widow his
neighbour. After his death this injustice troubled him, and as a
certain woman was going home one night, at a stile she passed over she
met Cadogan's ghost. By a strange forgetfulness, this woman for the
moment lost sight of the fact that Cadogan was now a ghost; she had
momentarily forgotten that Cadogan was dead. 'Mr. Cadogan,' said she,
with ungrammatical curiosity, 'what does you here this time o' night?'
To which the ghost answered, 'I was obliged to come.' It then
explained the matter of the landmarks, and begged the woman to request
a certain person (whom it mentioned) to remove them back to their
proper places; and then the ghost vanished. At this unexpected
termination of the interview, the woman suddenly recollected Cadogan's
death, and fell into a state of extreme terror. She however did as the
ghost had bidden her, and Cadogan walked no more.



