V.

A large proportion of these stories of ghostly perturbation concerning
hidden treasure include a further feature of great interest, relating
to transportation through the air. I have mentioned that ghosts
sometimes employ the services of the fairy Boobach in thus carrying
mortals from place to place. The fairies of Wales are indeed
frequently found to be on the best of terms with the ghosts. Their
races have much in common, and so many of their practices are alike
that one is not always absolutely sure whether he is dealing with a
fairy or a spectre, until some test-point crops up. However, in
transporting a mortal through the air, ghost and fairy work together.
The Boobach being set his task, complaisantly gives the mortal the
choice of being transported above wind, amid wind, or below wind. The
value of knowing beforehand what to expect, was never better
illustrated than in this place. The mortal who, with a natural
reluctance to get into an unpleasantly swift current, avoids
travelling mid-wind, misses a pleasant journey, for mid-wind is the
only agreeable mode of being borne by a Boobach. Should you choose to
go above wind, you are transported so high that you skim the clouds
and are in danger of being frightened to death. But choosing the
below-wind course is even worse, for then you are dragged through
bush, through briar, in a way to impress upon you the advice of Apollo
to Phaeton, and teach you the value of the golden mean. _In medio
tutissimus ibis._

