X.

It is interesting to observe, in connection with the subject of
transportation through the air, with what vitality this superstition
lingers in modern spiritualism. The accounts of such transportation
are familiar to every reader of newspapers. That Mr. Home was seen, by
a learned English nobleman, sailing through the moonlight seventy feet
from the ground, is on record; that Mrs. Guppy was transported from
Highbury Park to Lamb's Conduit Street, in London, in a trance and a
state of partial _d√©shabille_, is also on record; and that a
well-known American spiritualist was borne by invisible hands from
Chicago to Milwaukee and back, between midnight and 4 A.M., I have
been assured by a number of persons in Illinois who thoroughly
believed it, or said they did. But it certainly is not too much to
demand, that people who give credence to these instances of aerial
transportation should equally believe in the good old ghost stories of
the Welsh. The same consistency calls for credulity as to the
demoniacal elevation of Simon Magus, and the broomstick riding of the
witches whose supernatural levitation was credited by Lord Bacon and
Sir Matthew Hale, not to speak of Addison and Wesley.

There is something peculiarly fascinating to the gross denizens of
earth in this notion of skimming like a bird over house-tops. No
dreams, save those of love and dalliance, are so charming to the
dreamer as visions of flying; to find oneself floating along over the
tops of trees, over the streets where less favoured mortals walk, to
look down on them as they stroll, is to feel an exquisite pleasure.
The mind of childhood and that of ignorance, alike unable to
discriminate between reality and illusion, would naturally retain the
impression of such a dream with peculiar vividness. The superstition
has no doubt been fostered by this fact, although it, like most
superstitions, began its career in pre-historic days. The same class
of belief attaches to the magical lore of widely separated lands, in
all ages. The magic carpet of the Arabian Nights finds its parallel
to-day in the enchanted mat of the Chinese conjuror, which carries him
from place to place, at a height of twenty or thirty feet in the air.
The levitation involved is in Welsh story embodied in the person of
Sgilti Yscawndroed; when he was sent on a message through the wood he
went along the tops of the trees; in his whole life, a blade of reed
grass never bent beneath his feet, so light was his tread.[68]

FOOTNOTE:

[68] Lady Charlotte Guest's 'Mabinogion,' 225.

