II.

Tradition relates that Sion Cent was a famous necromancer in
Monmouthshire, who outwitted the devil, not once but many times. He
lives in popular legend simply as a worker in magic, but in reality he
was a worthy minister, the Rev. John Kent, who flourished from 1420 to
1470, and wrote several theological works in Latin. In his native
Welsh he confined himself to poetry, and Sion Cent was his Cymric
pseudonym. Like many learned men in those days, he was accredited with
magical powers by the ignorant peasantry, and of his transactions with
the devil many stories were then invented which still survive. One
relates that he once served as a farmer's boy, and was set to keep the
crows from the corn, but preferring to go to Grosmont fair, he
confined the crows in an old roofless barn by a magic spell till the
next day, when he returned. His compact with the devil enabled him to
build the bridge over the Monnow, near Grosmont, which still bears his
name. The compact gave the devil the man's soul, as all such compacts
do--the stipulation being that if his body were buried either in or
out of the church, his soul should be forfeit to the diawl. But the
shrewd Welshman gave orders that he should be buried exactly under the
chancel wall, so that he should lie neither in the church nor out of
it; and the devil was made a fool of by this device. A precisely
similar tradition exists concerning an old gentleman in
Carmarthenshire.

