V.

The English have a saying that the devil lives in the middle of Wales.
There is in every part of Wales that I have seen a custom of whitening
the doorsteps with chalk, and it is said to have originated in the
belief that his Satanic majesty could not enter a door thus protected.
The devil of slovenliness certainly would find difficulty in entering
a Welsh cottage if the tidiness of its doorstep is borne out in the
interior. But out-of-doors everywhere there are signs of the devil's
active habits. His flowers grow on the river-banks; his toes are
imprinted on the rocks. Near Tintern Abbey there is a jutting crag
overhung by gloomy branches of the yew, called the Devil's Pulpit. His
eminence used in other and wickeder days to preach atrocious morals,
or immorals, to the white-robed Cistercian monks of the abbey, from
this rocky pulpit. One day the devil grew bold, and taking his tail
under his arm in an easy and _dégagée_ manner, hobnobbed familiarly
with the monks, and finally proposed, just for a lark, that he should
preach them a nice red-hot sermon from the rood-loft of the abbey. To
this the monks agreed, and the devil came to church in high glee. But
fancy his profane perturbation (I had nearly written holy horror) when
the treacherous Cistercians proceeded to shower him with holy water.
The devil clapped his tail between his legs and scampered off howling,
and never stopped till he got to Llandogo, where he leaped across the
river into England, leaving the prints of his talons on a stone.

