I.

There are death portents in every country, and in endless variety; in
Wales these portents assume distinct and striking individualities, in
great number and with clearly defined attributes. The banshee,
according to Mr. Baring-Gould, has no corresponding feature in
Scandinavian, Teutonic, or classic mythology, and belongs entirely to
the Celts. The Welsh have the banshee in its most blood-curdling form
under the name of the Gwrach y Rhibyn; they have also the Cyhyraeth,
which is never seen, but is heard, moaning dolefully and dreadfully in
the night; the Tolaeth, also only heard, not groaning but imitating
some earthly sound, such as sawing, singing, or the tramping of feet;
the Cwn Annwn and Cwn y Wybr, Dogs of Hell and Dogs of the Sky; the
Canwyll Corph, or Corpse Candle; the Teulu, or Goblin Funeral, and
many others--all of them death-portents. These, as the more important
and striking, I will describe further; but there are several others
which must first be mentioned.

The Aderyn y Corph is a bird which chirps at the door of the person
who is about to die, and makes a noise that sounds like the Welsh word
for 'Come! come!' the summons to death.[88] In ancient tradition, it
had no feathers nor wings, soaring without support high in the
heavens, and, when not engaged upon some earthly message, dwelling in
the land of illusion and phantasy.[89] This corpse-bird may properly
be associated with the superstition regarding the screech-owl, whose
cry near a sick-bed inevitably portends death. The untimely crowing of
a cock also foretells the sudden demise of some member of the family.
In North Wales the cry of the golden plover is a death-omen; these
birds are called, in this connection, the whistlers.[90] The same
superstition prevails in Warwickshire, and the sound is called the
seven whistlers.

Thunder and lightning in mid-winter announce the death of the great
man of the parish. This superstition is thought to be peculiar to
Wales, or to the wilder and more secluded parts of North Wales.[91]
Also deemed peculiar to Wales is the Tan-wedd, a fiery apparition
which falls on the lands of a freeholder who is about to die. It is
described as appearing somewhat similar to falling stars, but slower
of motion. 'It lighteneth all the air and ground where it passeth,'
says 'the honest Welshman, Mr. Davis, in a letter to Mr. Baxter,'
adding, 'lasteth three or four miles or more, for aught is known,
because no man seeth the rising or beginning of it; and when it falls
to the ground it sparkleth and lighteth all about.'[92] It also comes
as a duty-performing goblin, after a death, haunting the graveyard,
and calling attention to some special grave by its conduct, as in the
following account: Walter Watkins, of the Neuadd, in a parish of
Brecknockshire, was going one dark night towards Taf Fechan Chapel,
not far from his house, when he saw a light near the chapel. It
increased till it was as big as a church tower, and decreased again
till it was as small as a star; then enlarged again and decreased as
before; and this it did several times. He went to his house and
fetched his father and mother to see it, and they all saw it plainly,
much to their astonishment and wonder. Some time after, as a neighbour
was ploughing in a field near the chapel, about where the mysterious
light had been seen, the plough struck against a large flat stone.
This the ploughman raised up, after a deal of difficulty, and under it
he found a stone chest, in which was the jawbone of a man, and nought
else except an earthen jug. The bone was supposed to be the remains of
a man who had disappeared long before, and whose wife had since
married; and on her being told of it, she fell ill and died. The
light, which had often been seen before by various persons, was after
this seen no more. It was believed to be the spirit of the murdered
man, appearing as a light.

Listening at the church-door in the dark, to hear shouted by a ghostly
voice in the deserted edifice the names of those who are shortly to be
buried in the adjoining churchyard, is a Hallow E'en custom in some
parts of Wales. In other parts, the window serves the same purpose.
There are said to be still extant, outside some village churches,
steps which were constructed in order to enable the superstitious
peasantry to climb to the window to listen. The principle of
'expectant attention,' so well known to physiological science, would
be likely in this case to act with special force as a ghost-raiser. In
an ancient MS. by Llywelyn Sion, of Llangewydd, there is mention of a
frightful monster called the Fad Felen, which was seen through the
key-hole of Rhos church by Maelgwn Gwynedd, who 'died in consequence.'
This monster was predicted in a poem by Taliesin, as a 'strange
creature' which should come from the sea marsh, with hair and teeth
and eyes like gold. The yellow fever plague, which raged in Wales
during some five years in the sixth century, is the monster referred
to in this legend.

The Scotch wraith and Irish fetch have their parallel in Wales in the
Lledrith, or spectre of a person seen before his death; it never
speaks, and vanishes if spoken to. It has been seen by miners previous
to a fatal accident in the mine. The story is told of a miner who saw
himself lying dead and horribly maimed in a phantom tram-car, led by a
phantom horse, and surrounded by phantom miners. As he watched this
dreadful group of spectres they passed on, looking neither to the
right nor the left, and faded away. The miner's dog was as frightened
as its master at the sight, and ran howling into the darkness. Though
deeming himself doomed, the miner continued to work in the pit; and as
the days passed on, and no harm came to him, he grew more cheerful,
and was so bold as to laugh at the superstition. The day he did this,
a stone fell from the roof and broke his arm. As soon as he recovered
he resumed work in the pit; his death followed instantly. A stone
crushed him, and he was borne maimed and dead in the tram along the
road where his lledrith had appeared, 'a mile below the play of
sunshine and wave of trees.'[93]

The Mallt y Nos, or night-fiend, is a death-omen mentioned by Rev.
D. R. Thomas in the 'Arch√¶ologia Cambrensis'; and Croker[94] gives as
the Welsh parallel of the Irish death-coach a spectre called ceffyl
heb un pen, or the headless horse. The marw coel, or 'yellow spot
before death,' is another death-omen which I have been able to trace
no further than the pages where I find it.[95]
