IV.

The close resemblance of this goblin to the Irish banshee (or benshi)
will be at once perceived. The same superstition is found among other
peoples of Celtic origin. Sir Walter Scott mentions it among the
highlands of Scotland.[96] It is not traced among other than Celtic
peoples distinctly, but its association with the primeval mythology
is doubtless to be found in the same direction with many other
death-omens, to wit, the path of the wind-god Hermes.

The frightful ugliness of the Gwrach y Rhibyn is a consistent feature
of the superstition, in both its forms; it recalls the Black Maiden
who came to Caerleon and liberated Peredur:[97] 'Blacker were her face
and her two hands than the blackest iron covered with pitch; and her
hue was not more frightful than her form. High cheeks had she, and a
face lengthened downwards, and a short nose with distended nostrils.
And one eye was of a piercing mottled gray, and the other was as black
as jet, deep-sunk in her head. And her teeth were long and yellow,
more yellow were they than the flower of the broom. And her stomach
rose from the breast-bone, higher than her chin. And her back was in
the shape of a crook, and her legs were large and bony. And her figure
was very thin and spare, except her feet and legs, which were of huge
size.' The Welsh word 'gwrach' means a hag or witch, and it has been
fancied that there is a connection between this word and the mythical
Avagddu,[98] whose wife the gwrach was.

The Gwrach y Rhibyn appears also as a river-spectre, in
Glamorganshire.
