IV.

The Tolaeth has one other form--that of a Voice which speaks, in a
simple and natural manner, but very significant words. Thus Edward
Lloyd, in the parish of Llangurig, was lying very ill, when the people
that were with him in his chamber heard a voice near them, but could
see no one; nor could they find any one anywhere about the house, to
whom the voice might belong. Soon afterwards they heard it utter, so
distinctly that it seemed to be in the room where they were, these
words, 'Y mae nenbren y t[^y] yn craccio,' (the upper beam of the
house cracketh.) Soon the Voice spoke again, saying, 'Fe dor yn y
man,' (it will presently break.) And once more it spoke: 'Dyna fe yn
tori,' (there it breaks.) That moment the sick man gave up the ghost.

John, the son of Watkin Elias Jones, of the parish of Mynyddyslwyn,
was one day ploughing in the field, when the oxen rested, and he sent
the lad who drove the oxen, to fetch something which he wanted; and
while thus alone in the field, he saw a cloud coming across the field
to him. When the cloud had come to that part of the field where he
was, it stopped, and shadowed the sun from him; and out of the cloud
came a Voice, which asked him which of these three diseases he would
choose to die of--fever, dropsy, or consumption. Being a man who could
give a plain answer to a plain question, he replied that he would
rather die of consumption. The lad now returning, he sent him home
with the oxen, and then, feeling inclined to sleep, lay down and
slept. When he awoke he was ill, and fell by degrees into a
consumption, of which he died one year from the day of this warning.
He did not tell of this apparition, however, until within six weeks of
his death.

