VII.

St. Patrick's Day is celebrated in Wales with much enthusiasm. The
Welsh believe that St. Patrick was a Welshman. Born at Llandeilo
Talybont, in Glamorganshire, and educated at the famous college of
Llantwit Major, he held St. David's place till the coming of Dewi was
announced to him; then he went into Ireland, to do missionary work,
as it were. This is the monastic tale. Patrick was comfortably settled
in the valley of Rosina, and intended to pass his life there, but an
angel came to him and said, 'Thou must leave this place to one who is
not yet born.' Patrick was annoyed, even angered, but obedient, and
went off to Ireland, where he became a great man.[120] The story of
the Iolo MSS., however, presents the matter in a different light:
'About A.D. 420 the Island of Britain seemed to have neither ruler nor
proprietor.' The Irish took advantage of this state of things to
invade and oppress Britain, robbing her of corn, cattle, 'and every
other moveable property that they could lay their hands on.' Among
other things, they stole away St. Patrick from the college at Llantwit
Major, 'whence that college became destitute of a principal and
teacher for more than forty years, and fell into dilapidation'--a
condition it remains in at present, by the way. 'Patrick never
returned to Wales, choosing rather to reside in Ireland; having
ascertained that the Irish were better people than the Welsh, in those
times.'[121] Still, it is not the native Welsh who are as a rule the
celebrators of St. Patrick's Day in Wales.
