II.

In Pembrokeshire, it was customary up to the close of the last
century, to walk barefoot to church on Good Friday, as had been done
since times prior to the Reformation. The old people and the young
joined in this custom, which they said was done so as not to 'disturb
the earth.' All business was suspended, and no horse nor cart was to
be seen in the town.

Hot-cross buns also figured in a peculiar manner at this time. They
were eaten in Tenby after the return from church. After having tied up
a certain number in a bag, the folk hung them in the kitchen, where
they remained till the next Good Friday, for use as medicine. It was
believed that persons labouring under any disease had only to eat a
portion of a bun to be cured. The buns so preserved were used also as
a panacea for all the diseases of domestic animals. They were further
believed to be serviceable in frightening away goblins of an evil
sort.

That these buns are of Christian invention is the popular belief, and
indeed this notion is not altogether exploded among the more
intelligent classes. Their connection with the cross of the Saviour is
possible by adoption--as the early Christians adopted many pagan rites
and customs--but that they date back to pre-historic times there is
abundant testimony.

Innumerable are the superstitious customs and beliefs associated with
Good Friday. In Pembrokeshire there was a custom called 'making
Christ's bed.' A quantity of long reeds were gathered from the river
and woven into the shape of a man. This effigy was then stretched on a
wooden cross, and laid in some retired field or garden, and left
there.

The birth of a child on that day is very unlucky--indeed a birth on
any Friday of the whole year is to be deprecated as a most unfortunate
circumstance.

