II.

The traditions connected with the Beltane fires are very interesting,
but the subject has received so much attention in published volumes
that it need not here be dwelt upon. The lad who in the United States
capers around a bonfire on the night of Independence Day has not a
suspicion that he is imitating the rites of an antiquity the most
remote; that in burning a heap of barrels and boxes in a public square
the celebrators of the American Fourth of July imitate the priests who
thus worshipped the sun-god Beal. The origins of our most familiar
customs are constantly being discovered in such directions as this.
On the face of the thing, nothing could be more absurd as a mode of
jollification, in a little American town, with its wooden
architecture, on a hot night in the midst of summer, than building a
roaring fire to make the air still hotter and endanger the surrounding
houses. The reason for the existence of such a custom must be sought
in another land and another time; had reflection governed the matter,
instead of tradition, the American anniversary would have found some
more fitting means of celebration than Druidic fires and Chinese
charms. (For it may be mentioned further, in this connection, that the
fire-crackers of our urchins are quite as superstitious in their
original purpose as the bonfire is. In China, even to this day,
fire-crackers are charms pure and simple, their office to drive away
evil spirits, their use as a means of jollification quite unknown to
their inventors.) A far more sensible Midsummer rite, especially in a
hot country, would have been to adopt the custom of St. Ulric's day,
and eat fish. This saint's day falls on the fourth of July, and
Barnabe Googe's translation of Naogeorgius has this couplet concerning
it:

    Wheresoeuer Huldryche hath his place, the people there brings in
    Both carpes and pykes, and mullets fat, his fauour here to win.

