III.

The Welsh saint called Cynog was one of the numberless children of
that famous old patriarch Brychan Brycheiniog, and had his memory
honoured, until a comparatively recent period, in the parish of
Defynog. Here, on this saint's feast Monday, which fell in October,
there was a custom called 'carrying Cynog.' Cynog was represented by a
man who was paid for his services with money, or with a suit of
clothes--sometimes a 'stranger' from an adjoining parish, but on the
last recorded occasion a drunken farmer of the neighbourhood. He was
clad in dilapidated garments, and borne through the village; after
which he was tumbled headlong into the river amid the jeers of the
crowd, to scramble out as best he might. It was not a very respectful
way of commemorating a saint who had been buried a thousand years or
thereabouts; but such as it was it died out early in the present
century. The ducking which ended the performance has been supposed to
be a puritan improvement on what was before a religious ceremony, or
mystery. It is more than possibly a relic of the Druidic sacrificial
rites; in cases where a river ran near, at the time of the Beltane
fires, a sacrifice by water was substituted for that of flame.

The feast of St. Cynog continued for a week. On the Tuesday there was
a singular marketing in the churchyard; from all about the farmers
brought their tithe of cheese, and taking it to the churchyard, laid
it on the tombstones, where it was sold for the parson's behoof.

