IV.

Of common prevalence formerly, and still observed in numerous
parishes, is the custom called the Plygain, or watching for the dawn.
This consists in proceeding to the church at three o'clock on
Christmas morning, and uniting in a service which is held by the light
of small green candles made for the purpose. Sometimes this ceremony
is observed at home, the people in a farm-house holding a
jollification on the Christmas eve, and sitting up all night to greet
the dawn. If the east wind blew on the Christmas eve the circumstance
was deemed propitious in this connection. This wind was called 'gwynt
traed y meirw,' (the wind blowing over the feet of the corpses,)
because it blew towards the foot of the graves in the churchyards. It
was also believed that the dumb animals paid their tribute of respect
to this night; the bees would hum loudly in their hives at midnight,
and the cattle in the cow-houses would bend their knees as in
adoration.[131]

A Christmas-eve custom among Welsh colliers is to carry from house to
house a board stuck over with lighted candles, or to wheel a
handbarrow containing a bed of clay in which the candles are stuck.
This is called 'the Star,' sometimes 'the Star of Bethlehem,' and when
stopping before a house the men kneel about it and sing a carol. A
like custom exists in Belgium, among children. The purpose is to
solicit a Rhodd Nadolig, or Christmas gift.

FOOTNOTE:

[131] 'Cymru Fu,' 403.

