V.

The British Boxing-day is well known, both as to its customs and its
origin. The Christmas-box, or thrift-box, is still to be seen in
barber shops in Wales, fastened to the wall, or standing conveniently
under the looking-glass among the pots and brushes. At one time the
custom became such a nuisance throughout Britain that an outcry was
raised about it. It got to that pass that the butcher and baker would
send their apprentices around among their customers to levy
contributions. The English Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, in
1837, sent a circular to the different embassies requesting their
excellencies and charg√©s d'affaires to discontinue the customary
Christmas-boxes to the 'messengers of the Foreign Department, domestic
servants of Viscount Palmerston, foreign postmen, etc.' The nuisance
is hardly less prevalent now. The faithful postman in Wales not only
expects to be remembered at Christmas, but he expects to be given a
precise sum, and if he does not get it he is capable of asking for it.
In one case, a postman accustomed to receive five shillings at a
certain office, on asking for his 'box,' was told the usual donor was
absent in London, whereupon he requested the clerk to write up to him
in London immediately on the subject. These things strike a stranger
as very singular, among a people usually so self-respecting. Warnings
are from time to time issued on this subject by those in authority,
but the custom is likely to survive so long as it is not ranked
outright with beggary. Like the Christmas-tree, it is a graceful thing
among the children, or among friends or household servants, if
spontaneous; but as a tax, it is an odious perversion.[132]

FOOTNOTE:

[132] Among those who last Christmas applied at my house for 'his box,
sir, if you please' (as my maid put it), quite as a matter of course,
were the postman, the leader of the waits, the boy who brings the
daily newspapers, the bookseller's boy, the chimney-sweep, the
dustman, the grocer's man, etc., etc., no one of whom I had ever set
eyes on. The equal of this I never encountered, except in Paris, on
the _jour de l'an_.

