II.

The Welsh custom of Bundling, or courting abed, needs no description.
The Welsh words sopen and sypio mean a bundle and to bundle, and they
mean a squeezed-up mass, and to squeeze together; but there is a
further meaning, equivalent to our word baggage, as applied to a
strumpet.[135] The custom of bundling is still practised in certain
rural neighbourhoods of Wales. To discuss its moral character is not
my province in these pages; but I may properly record the fact that
its practice is not confined to the irreligious classes. It is also
pertinent here to recall the circumstance that among these people
anciently, courtship was guarded by the sternest laws, so that any
other issue to courtship than marriage was practically impossible. If
a maiden forgot her duty to herself, her parents, and her training,
when the evil result became known she was to be thrown over a
precipice; the young man who had abused the parents' confidence was
also to be destroyed. Murder itself was punished less severely.
Customs of promiscuous sleeping arose in the earliest times, out of
the necessities of existence in those primitive days, when a whole
household lay down together on a common bed of rushes strewn on the
floor of the room. In cold weather they lay close together for greater
warmth, with their usual clothing on. CÃ¦sar's misconception that the
ancient Britons were polyandrous polygamists evidently had here its
source.

It is only by breathing the very atmosphere of an existence whose
primitive influences we may thus ourselves feel, that we can get a
just conception of the underlying forces which govern a custom like
this. Of course it is sternly condemned by every advanced moralist,
even in the neighbourhoods where it prevails. An instance came to my
knowledge but a short time ago, (in 1877,) where the vicar of a
certain parish (Mydrim, Carmarthenshire) exercised himself with great
zeal to secure its abolition. Unfortunately, in this instance, the
good man was not content with abolishing bundling, he wanted to
abolish more innocent forms of courting; and worst of all, he turned
his ethical batteries chiefly upon the lads and lasses of the
dissenting congregation. Of course, it was not the vicar's fault that
the bundlers were among the meeting-house worshippers, and not among
the established church-goers, but nevertheless it injured the
impartiality of his championship in the estimation of 'the Methodys.'
I am not sure the bundling might not have ceased, in deference to his
opinions, notwithstanding, if he had not, in the excess of his zeal,
complained of the young men for seeing the girls home after meeting,
and casually stretching the walk beyond what was necessary. Such
intermeddling as this taxed the patience of the courting community to
its extreme limit, and it assumed a rebellious front. The vicar, quite
undaunted, pursued the war with vigour; he smote the enemy hip and
thigh. He returned to the charge with the assertion that these young
people had 'schools for the art of kissing,' a metaphorical
expression, I suppose; and that they indulged in flirtation. This was
really too much. Bundling might or might not be an exclusively
dissenting practice, but the most unreasonable of vicars must know
that kissing and flirtation were as universal as the parish itself;
and so there was scoffing and flouting of the vicar, and, as rebounds
are proverbially extreme, I fear there is now more bundling in Mydrim
than ever.

FOOTNOTE:

[135] The Rev. Dr. Thomas, late President of Pontypool College, whose
acquaintance with Welsh customs is very extensive, (and to whose
erudition I have been frequently indebted during the progress of these
pages through the press,) tells me he never heard the word sopen or
sypio, synonymous with bundling, used for the old custom, but only
'caru yn y gwelu,' (courting abed.)

