I.

Wales retains several ancient customs in connection with weddings,
which are elsewhere extinct. No one who has ever paid any attention to
Wales and its ways can have failed to hear of that most celebrated
rite the Bidding, which is, however, one of several picturesque
survivals less well known to the outer world. The Bidding wedding must
be spoken of as an existing custom, although it be confined to rural
neighbourhoods in South Wales, and to obscure and humble folk. Those
who strive to prove that all such customs are obsolete everywhere--a
thankless and even ungraceful task, it seems to me--will not admit
that the Bidding has been known since 1870. I have evidence, however,
that in Pembroke, Cardigan, and Carmarthen shires, the custom did not
cease on the date named, and there is every probability that it
prevails to-day. Nothing could be of smaller importance, it is true,
than the precise date on which a given custom recently ceased, since
any one may revive it next year who chooses to do so.

The Bidding is an invitation sent by a couple who are about to be
married, soliciting the presence and donations of the neighbours on
their behalf. The presents may be either sums of money or
necessaries. Gifts of bread, butter, cheese, tea, sugar, and the like,
are common, and sometimes articles of farming stock and household
furniture. All gifts of money are recognized by a sort of promissory
note, i.e., by setting down the name and residence of the donor, with
the amount given; and when a like occasion arises on the part of the
giver, the debt is religiously paid. The obligation is an absolute
one, and its legality has actually been recognized by the Court of
Great Sessions at Cardiff. The gift is even claimable under other
circumstances than the donor's getting married. Another sort of
contribution is the eatables and drinkables which are set before the
guests; these are only repayable when required on a like occasion.

The method of bidding the guests was until lately through a personage
called the gwahoddwr (inviter or bidder) who tramped about the country
some days beforehand, proclaiming the particulars to everybody he met.
He usually recited a doggerel set of rhymes before and after the
special invitation--a composition of his own, or understood to be
such, for rhyme-making was a part of the talent of a popular bidder.
Frequently no little humour was displayed in the bidding song. But
since the printing press became the cheap and ready servant of the
humblest classes, the occupation of the bidder has gradually fallen to
decay; a printed circular serves in his place. At the shop of a
printer in Carmarthen I procured a copy of the following bidding
circular, which may be a real document, or a fictitious one:

    CARMARTHENSHIRE, JULY 4TH, 1862.

    As we intend to enter the Matrimonial State, on Wednesday,
    the 30th of July instant, we purpose to make a BIDDING on
    the occasion, the same day, at the Young Man's Father's
    House, called TY'R BWCI, in the Parish of Llanfair ar y
    Bryn, when and where the favour of your good and agreeable
    company is respectfully solicited, and whatever donation you
    may be pleased to confer on us then will be thankfully
    received, warmly acknowledged, and cheerfully repaid
    whenever called for on a similar occasion.

    By your most obedient Servants,

         OWEN GWYN,
         ELEN MORGAN.

    The Young Man, his Father and Mother (Llewelyn and Margaret
    Gwyn, of Ty'r Bwci), his Brother (Evan Gwyn, Maes y Blodau),
    his Sisters (Gwladys and Hannah), and his Aunt (Mary Bowen,
    Llwyn y Fedwen, Llannon), desire that all gifts of the above
    nature due to them be returned to the Young Man on the above
    day, and will be thankful for all additional favours
    granted.

    The Young Woman, her Father (Rhys Morgan, Castell y Moch),
    and her Brothers and Sister (Howel, Gruffydd, and Gwenll√Øan
    Morgan), desire that all gifts of the above nature due to
    them be returned to the Young Woman on the above day, and
    will be thankful for all additional favours conferred on
    her.

    The Young Man's company will meet in the Morning at Ty'r
    Bwci; and the Young Woman's at Pant y Clacwydd, near the
    Village of Llansadwrn.

The Bidding is sometimes held on the day of the wedding, and sometimes
on the day and night before it; the custom varies in different
districts, as all these customs do. When the latter is the case, the
night is an occasion of great merrymaking, with much consumption of
cwrw da, and dancing to the music of the harp, for poor indeed would
be the Welsh community that could not muster up a harper. This
festival is called Nos Blaen, or preceding night, and is a further
source of income to the couple, from the sale of cakes and cwrw. 'Base
is the slave who pays' is a phrase emphatically reversed at a Welsh
wedding.

  [Illustration: THE OLD-TIME GWAHODDWR.]

The Bidding is but one form of a feature of Welsh life which
extensively prevails, known by the term Cymmhorth. The Bidding is a
Priodas Cymmhorth; the Cyfarfod Cymmhorth, or Assistance Meeting, is
much the same thing, minus the wedding feature. The customs of the
latter festival are, however, often of a sort distinctly tending
toward matrimonial results as an eventuality. A number of farmer girls
of the humbler sort will gather at a stated time and place to give a
day's work to one needing assistance, and after a day spent in such
toil as may be required, the festival winds up with jollity in the
evening. The day is signalized on the part of those youths of the
neighbourhood who are interested in the girls, by tokens of that
interest in the shape of gifts. The lass who receives a gift
accompanied by a twig of birch is thereby assured of her lover's
constancy. To her whom the young man would inform of his change of
heart, a sprig of hazel is given. An earlier feature of this ceremony
was the Merry Andrew, who presented the gifts in the name of the
lover. This personage was disguised fantastically, and would lead the
young woman he selected into another room, where he would deliver the
gift and whisper the giver's name.

The antiquity of the Bidding as a local custom is undoubted. The
old-time gwahoddwr was a person of much importance, skilled in
pedigrees and family traditions, and himself of good family. A
chieftain would assume the character in behalf of his vassal, and
hostile clans respected his person as he went about from castle to
castle, from hall to hall. He bore a garlanded staff as the emblem of
his office, and on entering a dwelling would strike his staff upon the
floor to command the attention of the group before him, and then begin
his address.

