IV.

A custom called the Coolstrin is now apparently obsolete, unless in
occasional rural communities remote from railroads. It resembles the
old custom once known in certain parts of England, called the skimitry
or skimmington, in which a man whose wife had struck him was forced to
ride behind a woman, with his face to the horse's tail, while a band
of pans and cow-horns made music for them. The Welsh custom is,
however, more elaborate, and more comical, while it is less severe on
the man. A husband who is suspected of having a termagant wife, is
made the subject of espionage. If it be found that he drinks his mug
of ale standing, with his eye twinkling toward the door, the
circumstance is considered most suspicious. Efforts are accordingly
made to induce the henpecked man to stay and be merry, and if he can
be made drunk a great point is gained, as then a squad of volunteers
take him inside his own door and critically observe his reception. A
moral point involved appears to be that a henpecked husband is a
disgrace to manhood in general; and the purpose of the coolstrin is to
reform it altogether. However, although it may even be proved that a
woman is in the habit of cuffing her husband, the case does not come
under the jurisdiction of the coolstrin court until she has 'drawn
blood on him.' Then the court is convened. It is composed, no doubt,
of any rakehelly youngsters, married or single, who are ripe for
sport. One of them is chosen for judge; a special point is that he
must be a married man who is not afraid of his wife; and he is
invested with robe and gown, that is to say, the collar-bone of a
horse is set on his head, around the crown of a slouch hat, and a
bed-quilt is made fast to his shoulders. He marches through the
streets, with a youth behind him bearing his bed-quilt train, and
mounts a chosen wall for a judge's bench. Officers with long white
wands range themselves solemnly on either side of him; men are chosen
as advocates; and a posse of rustics with pitchforks keeps order. The
court is opened by a crier who calls on all good men who as yet wear
their own clos,[140] to attend the court. The case is argued by the
advocates; witnesses are examined to prove, first, that the man is
henpecked, second, that his wife has struck him and drawn blood with
the blow. In one case it was proved that the wife had knocked her
beery lord down, and that his nose, striking a stool, had bled. The
wife's advocate nearly gravelled the judge, by holding that blood
drawn by a stool could not be said to have been drawn by the woman.
The judge got over this by deciding that if the woman had taken the
stool by one of its three legs, and hit the man, drawing blood, the
blood would be clearly chargeable to her. 'And where is the
difference,' asked he, triumphantly, 'between knocking the stool
against him, and knocking him against the stool?' The woman was found
guilty. 'For,' said the prosecuting attorney indignantly, 'if a man
shan't drink a blue of beer with a neighbour or so, to what won't it
come?' Her condemnation followed; to be ridden on the Ceffyl Pren. A
derisive procession was formed, and two fellows were rigged up to
personate the husband and wife. The male bore a broom, and the female
brandished a ladle, and the two were paraded through the town. A band
of 'musicians' marched before them, beating frying-pans with marrow
bones, banging gridirons and kettles with pokers, tongs and shovels,
and two playing on a fife and drum. These were followed by two
standard bearers, one bearing a petticoat on top of a pole, the other
a pair of breeches in the same manner. Other orts and ends of rabble
made up the procession, which with antic and grimace marched about the
village and neighbourhood. The orgie ended by the planting in front of
the culprit's house of the pole and petticoat, and the pelting of it
with addled eggs, stones, and mud, till it fell to the ground. The
noble bifurcated emblem of manhood, the clos, was then elevated
proudly aloft, and the woman's punishment was deemed complete.

This is the story of a rural village in Glamorganshire. The custom
was known in other counties, and varied in its details. In
Breconshire, the virago was punished through the ceffyl pren merely by
the moral influence of parading it before her cottage. Quarrelsome
wives were said to stand in great and constant dread of its possible
appearance before their doors. In Cardiganshire, on the contrary, the
custom termed the coolstrin is _vice vers√¢_, and it is only husbands
who ill-use their wives who are amenable to its discipline.

FOOTNOTE:

[140] Breeches.



