II.

What connection there may be between these customs and the strange and
striking rite of the Sin-eater, is a question worthy of careful
consideration. It has been the habit of writers with family ties in
Wales, whether calling themselves Welshmen or Englishmen, to associate
these and like customs with the well-known character for hospitality
which the Cymry have for ages maintained. Thus Malkin writes: 'The
hospitality of the country is not less remarkable on melancholy than
on joyful occasions. The invitations to a funeral are very general and
extensive; and the refreshments are not light, and taken standing, but
substantial and prolonged. Any deficiency in the supply of ale would
be as severely censured on this occasion, as at a festival.'[146] Some
have thought that the bread-eating and beer-drinking are survivals of
the sin-eating custom described by Aubrey, and repeated from him by
others. But well-informed Welshmen have denied that any such custom
as that of the Sin-eater ever existed in Wales at any time, or in the
border shires; and it must not be asserted that they are wrong unless
we have convincing proof to support the assertion. The existing
evidence in support of the belief that there were once Sin-eaters in
Wales I have carefully collated and (excluding hearsay and second-hand
accounts), it is here produced. The first reference to the Sin-eater
anywhere to be found is in the Lansdowne MSS. in the British Museum,
in the handwriting of John Aubrey, the author. It runs thus: 'In the
county of Hereford was an old custom at funerals to hire poor people,
who were to take upon them the sins of the party deceased. One of them
(he was a long, lean, ugly, lamentable poor rascal), I remember, lived
in a cottage on Rosse highway. The manner was that when the corpse was
brought out of the house, and laid on the bier, a loaf of bread was
brought out, and delivered to the Sin-eater, over the corpse, as also
a mazard bowl of maple, full of beer (which he was to drink up), and
sixpence in money, in consideration whereof he took upon him, _ipso
facto_, all the sins of the defunct, and freed him or her from walking
after they were dead.' Aubrey adds, 'and this custom though rarely
used in our days, yet by some people was observed in the strictest
time of the Presbyterian Government; as at Dynder (_nolens volens_ the
parson of the parish), the kindred of a woman, deceased there, had
this ceremony punctually performed, according to her will: and also,
the like was done at the city of Hereford, in those times, where a
woman kept many years before her death a mazard bowl for the
Sin-eater; and the like in other places in this country; as also in
Brecon, e.g., at Llangors, where Mr. Gwin, the minister, about 1640,
could not hinder the performance of this custom. I believe,' says
Aubrey, 'this custom was heretofore used all over Wales.' He states
further, 'A.D. 1686: This custom is used to this day in North Wales.'
Upon this, Bishop White Kennet made this comment: 'It seems a
remainder of this custom which lately obtained at Amersden, in the
county of Oxford; where, at the burial of every corpse, one cake and
one flaggon of ale, just after the interment, were brought to the
minister in the church porch.'[147]

No other writer of Aubrey's time, either English or Welsh, appears to
have made any reference to the Sin-eater in Wales; and equal silence
prevails throughout the writings of all previous centuries. Since
Aubrey, many references to it have been made, but never, so far as I
can discover, by any writer in the Welsh language--a singular omission
if there ever was such a custom, for concerning every other
superstitious practice commonly ascribed to Wales the Welsh have
written freely.

In August, 1852, the Cambrian Arch√¶ological Association held its sixth
annual meeting at Ludlow, under the Presidency of Hon. R. H. Clive,
M.P. At this meeting Mr. Matthew Moggridge, of Swansea, made some
observations on the custom of the Sin-eater, when he added details not
contained in Aubrey's account given above. He said: 'When a person
died, his friends sent for the Sin-eater of the district, who on his
arrival placed a plate of salt on the breast of the defunct, and upon
the salt a piece of bread. He then muttered an incantation over the
bread, which he finally ate, thereby eating up all the sins of the
deceased. This done he received his fee of 2_s._ 6_d._ and vanished as
quickly as possible from the general gaze; for, as it was believed
that he really appropriated to his own use and behoof the sins of all
those over whom he performed the above ceremony, he was utterly
detested in the neighbourhood--regarded as a mere Pariah--as one
irredeemably lost.' The speaker then mentioned the parish of Llandebie
where the above practice 'was said to have prevailed to a recent
period.' He spoke of the survival of the plate and salt custom near
Swansea, and indeed generally, within twenty years, (i.e. since 1830)
and added: 'In a parish near Chepstow it was usual to make the figure
of a cross on the salt, and cutting an apple or an orange into
quarters, to put one piece at each termination of the lines.' Mr.
Allen, of Pembrokeshire, testified that the plate and salt were known
in that county, where also a lighted candle was stuck in the salt; the
popular notion was that it kept away the evil spirit. Mr. E. A.
Freeman, (the historian) asked if Sin-eater was the term used in the
district where the custom prevailed, and Mr. Moggridge said it was.

Such is the testimony. I venture no opinion upon it further than may
be conveyed in the remark that I cannot find any direct corroboration
of it, as regards the Sin-eater, and I have searched diligently for
it. The subject has engaged my attention from the first moment I set
foot on Cambrian soil, and I have not only seen no reference to it in
Welsh writings, but I have never met any unlettered Welshman who had
ever heard of it. All this proves nothing, perhaps; but it weighs
something.[148]
