PREFACE.


The erudite Lessing styles a preface “the history of a book.” Now,
though there can be no necessity for a preface in that sense of the
word to the reprint of a work of mere whim, which has been nearly ten
years before the public, yet a few words are requisite to prevent the
present condensed and revised edition from being considered an
abridgment.

However compact may be the mode of printing adopted, the act of
compressing into one volume the three in which the “Fairy Legends”
originally appeared, involved to a certain extent the necessity of
selection, perhaps the most difficult of all tasks judiciously to
perform; but the following statement will show the system proceeded
on.

Forty tales descriptive of Irish superstitions now appear instead of
fifty. All superfluous annotations have been struck out, and a brief
summary at the end of each section substituted, explanatory of the
classification adopted, and in which a few additional notes have been
introduced, as well as upon the text. It is therefore hoped that this
curtailment will be regarded as an essential improvement; some useless
repetition in the tales being thereby avoided, and much irrelevant
matter in the notes dispensed with, although nothing which illustrates
in the slightest degree the popular Fairy Creed of Ireland has been
sacrificed. At the same time, the omission of a portion of the ten
immaterial tales will sufficiently answer doubts idly raised as to the
question of authorship.



