FOOTNOTES:

[298] In Swiss _Härdmandle_, pl. _Härdmändlene_.

[299] Wyss, Reise in das Berner Oberland, ii. 412. _Servants_ is the
term in the original.

[300] This Scottish word, signifying the summer cabin of the herdsmen
on the mountains, exactly expresses the Sennhütten of the Swiss.

[301] Alpenrosen for 1824, _ap._ Grimm, Introd. to Irish Fairy Legends.

[302] Idyllen, Volkssagen, Legenden, und Erzählungen aus der Schweiz.
Von J. Rud Wyss, Prof. Bern, 1813.

[303] In Bilder und Sagen aus der Schweiz, von Dr. Rudolf. Müller.
Glarus, 1842, may be found some legends of the Erdmännlein, but they
are nearly all the same as those collected by Mr. Wyss. We give below
those in which there is anything peculiar.

[304] The original is in German hexameters.

[305] It is a notion in some parts of Germany, that if a girl leaves
any flax or tow on her distaff unspun on Saturday night, none of what
remains will make good thread. Grimm, Deut. Mythol. Anhang, p. lxxii.

[306] _Glanz_ is the term employed in Switzerland.

[307] This legend was picked up by a friend of Mr. Wyss when on a
topographical ramble in the neighbourhood of Bern. It was told to him
by a peasant of Belp; "but," says Mr. Wyss, "if I recollect right,
this man said it was a nice smoking-hot cake that was on the plate,
and it was a servant, not the man's son, who was driving the plough.
The circumstance of the table-cloth being handed down from mother to
daughter," he adds, "is a fair addition which I have allowed myself."

The writer recollects to have heard this story, when a boy, from an
old woman in Ireland; and he could probably point out the very field
in the county of Kildare where it occurred. A man and a boy were
ploughing: the boy, as they were about in the middle of their furrow,
smelled roast beef, and wished for some. As they returned, it was
lying on the grass before them. When they had eaten, the boy said "God
bless me, and God bless the fairies!" The man did not give thanks, and
he met with misfortunes very shortly after.--The same legend is also
in Scotland. See below.

[308] The former account was obtained by a friend in Glarnerland. The
latter was given to Mr. Wyss himself by a man of Zweylütschinen, very
rich, says Mr. Wyss, in Dwarf lore, and who accompanied him to
Lauterbrunnen. Schiller has founded his poem Der Alpenjäger on this
legend.

[309] Mr. Wyss heard this and the following tale in Haslithal and
Gadmen.

[310] In several of the high valleys of Switzerland it is only a
single cherry-tree which happens to be favourably situated that bears
fruit. It bears abundantly, and the fruit ripens about the month of
August. _Wyss._

[311] Compare the narrative in the Swiss dialect given by Grimm, Deut.
Mythol. p. 419. The same peasant of Belp who related the first legend
was Mr. Wyss's authority for this one. "The vanishing of the
Bergmänlein," says Mr. Wyss, "appears to be a matter of importance to
the popular faith. It is almost always ascribed to the fault of
mankind--sometimes to their wickedness."

We may in these tales recognise the box of Pandora under a different
form, but the ground is the same. Curiosity and wickedness are still
the cause of superior beings withdrawing their favour from man.

"I have never any where else," says Mr. Wyss, "heard of the
goose-feet; but that all is not right with their feet is evident from
the popular tradition giving long trailing mantles as the dress of the
little people. Some will have it that their feet are regularly formed,
but set on their legs the wrong way, so that the toes are behind and
the heels before."

Heywood, in his Hierarchie of the Blessed Angels, p. 554, relates a
story which would seem to refer to a similar belief.

[312] Müller, Bilder und Sagen, p. 119; see above, p. 81. Coals are
the usual form under which the Dwarfs conceal the precious metals. We
also find this trait in Scandinavia. A smith who lived near Aarhuus in
Jutland, as he was going to church, saw a Troll on the roadside very
busy about two straws that had got across each other on a heap of
coals, and which, do what he would, he could not remove from their
position. He asked the smith to do it for him; but he who knew better
things took up the coals with the cross straws on them, and carried
them home in spite of the screams of the Troll, and when he reached
his own house he found it was a large treasure he had got, over which
the Troll had lost all power. Thiele, i. 122.

[313] Müller, _ut sup._ p. 123.

[314] Müller, _ut sup._ p. 126.

[315] This story is told of two places in the Highlands of Berning, of
Ralligen, a little village on the lake of Thun, where there once stood
a town called Roll; and again, of Schillingsdorf, a place in the
valley of Grinderwald, formerly destroyed by a mountain slip.

The reader need scarcely be reminded of the stories of Lot and of
Baucis and Philemon: see also Grimm's Kinder und Hausmärchen, iii.
153, for other parallels.



