                        _Addlers and Menters._

An old lady in Yorkshire related as follows:--My eldest daughter
Betsey was about four years old; I remember it was on a fine summer's
afternoon, or rather evening, I was seated in this chair which I now
occupy. The child had been in the garden, she came into that entry or
passage from the kitchen (on the right side of the entry was the old
parlour-door, on the left the door of the common sitting-room; the
mother of the child was in a line with both the doors); the child,
instead of turning towards the sitting-room made a pause at the
parlour-door, which was open. She stood several minutes quite still;
at last I saw her draw her hand quickly towards her body; she set up a
loud shriek and ran, or rather flew, to me crying out "Oh! Mammy,
green man will hab me! green man will hab me!" It was a long time
before I could pacify her; I then asked her why she was so frightened.
"O Mammy," she said, "all t'parlour is full of _addlers_ and
_menters_." Elves and fairies (spectres?) I suppose she meant. She
said they were dancing, and a little man in a green coat with a gold
laced cocked hat on his head, offered to take her hand as if he would
have her as his partner in the dance. The mother, upon hearing this,
went and looked into the old parlour, but the fairy vision had melted
into thin air. "Such," adds the narrator, "is the account I heard of
this vision of fairies. The person is still alive who witnessed or
supposed she saw it, and though a well-informed person, still
positively asserts the relation to be strictly true.[355]
