
Ritson, who was a native of the bishopriek of Durham, tells us[356] that
the fairies frequented many parts of it; that they were described as
being of the smallest size, and uniformly habited in green. They could,
however, change their size and appearance. "A woman," he says, "who had
been in their society challenged one of the guests whom she espied in
the market selling fairy-butter.[357] This freedom was deeply resented,
and cost her the eye she first saw him with. Some one informed him that
an acquaintance of his in Westmoreland, wishing to see a fairy, was told
that on such a day on the side of such a hill, he should be gratified.
He went, and there, to use his own words, "the hobgoblin stood before
him in the likeness of a green-coat lad," but vanished instantly. This,
he said, the man told him. A female relation of his own told Mr. Ritson
of Robin Goodfellow's, it would seem, thrashing the corn, churning the
butter, drinking the milk, etc., and when all was done, lying before the
fire "_like a great rough hurgin_ (hugging?) _bear_."[358]

The Barguest used also to appear in the shape of a mastiff-dog and
other animals, and terrify people with his _skrikes_ (shrieks). There
was a Barguest named the Picktree Brag, whose usual form was that of a
little galloway, "in which shape a farmer, still or lately living
thereabouts, reported that it had come to him one night as he was going
home; that he got upon it and rode very quietly till it came to a great
pond, to which it ran and threw him in, and _went laughing away_."

       *       *       *       *       *

In Northumberland the belief in the fairies is not yet extinct. The
writer from whom we derive the following legends tells us[359] that he
knew an old man whose dog had _pointed_ a troop of fairies,[360] and
though he could not see them he plainly heard their music sounding like
a fiddle and a _very small_ pair of pipes. He also tells us, that many
years ago a girl who lived near Nether Witton, as she was returning from
milking with her pail on her head, saw the fairies playing in the
fields, and though she pointed them out to her companions they could not
see them. The reason it seemed was her _weise_ or pad for bearing the
pail on her head was composed of four-leaved clover, which gives the
power of seeing fairies. Spots are pointed out in sequestered places as
the favourite haunts of the elves. A few miles from Alnwick is a
fairy-ring, round which if people run more than nine times, some evil
will befall them. The children constantly run this number, but nothing
will induce them to venture a tenth run.

