FOOTNOTES:

[22] See D'Herbelot, Richardson's Dissertation, Ouseley's Persian
Miscellanies, Wahl in the Mines de l'Orient, Lane, Thousand and One
Nights, Forbes, Hatim Taï, etc., etc.

[23] Ormuzd employed himself for three thousand years in making the
heavens and their celestial inhabitants, the Ferohers, which are the
angels and the unembodied souls of all intelligent beings. All nature
is filled with Ferohers, or guardian angels, who watch over its
various departments, and are occupied in performing their various
tasks for the benefit of mankind.--_Erskine on the Sacred Books and
Religion of the Parsis, in the Transactions of the Literary Society of
Bombay_, vol. ii. p. 318. The Feroher bears in fact a very strong
resemblance to the Genius of the ancient Roman religion: see our
Mythology of Greece and Italy.

[24] This word is pronounced _Perry_ or rather _Parry_.

[25] [Illustration] Hence it follows that the very plausible idea of
the Peri having been the same with the Feroher cannot be correct.

[26] Translated by Mr. Duncan Forbes. It is to be regretted that he
has employed the terms Fairies and Demons instead of Peries and Deevs.

[27] See Lane, Thousand and One Nights, i. p. 21, _seq._

[28] The Cahermân Nâmeh is a romance in Turkish. Cahermân was the
father of Sâm, the grandfather of the celebrated Roostem.

[29] It is in the Cahermân Nâmeh that this circumstance occurs.

[30] [Illustration] The Tahmuras Nâmeh is also in Turkish. It and the
Cahermân Nâmeh are probably translations from the Persian. As far as
we are aware, Richardson is the only orientalist who mentions these
two romances.

[31] [Illustration] It signifies 'thirty birds' and is thought to be
the roc of the Arabs. The poet Sâdee, to express the bounty of the
Almighty says

[Illustration]

      His liberal board he spreadeth out so wide,
      On Kâf the Seemurgh is with food supplied.

The Seemurgh probably belongs to the original mythology of Persia, for
she appears in the early part of the Shâh Nâmeh. When Zâl was born to
Sâm Nerimân, his hair proved to be white. The father regarding this as
a proof of Deev origin, resolved to expose him, and sent him for that
purpose to Mount Elburz. Here the poor babe lay crying and sucking his
fingers till he was found by the Seemurgh, who abode on the summit of
Elburz, as she was looking for food for her young ones. But God put
pity into her heart, and she took him to her nest and reared him with
her young. As he grew up, the caravans that passed by, spread the fame
of his beauty and his strength, and a vision having informed Sâm that
he was his son, he set out for Elburz to claim him from the Seemurgh.
It was with grief that Zâl quitted the maternal nest. The Seemurgh,
when parting with her foster-son, gave him one of her feathers, and
bade him, whenever he should be in trouble or danger, to cast it into
the fire, and he would have proof of her power; and she charged him at
the same time strictly never to forget his nurse.

[32] See _Arabian Romance_.

[33] [Illustration] a pearl. Life, soul also, according to Wilkins.

[34] Ferdousee's great heroic poem. It is remarkable that the Peries
are very rarely spoken of in this poem. They merely appear in it with
the birds and beasts among the subjects of the first Iranian monarchs.

[35] Chap. xx. translation of Jonathan Scott, 1799.

[36] See below, _Shetland_.

[37] _i. e._ possessed, insane. It is like the [Greek: nympholêptos]
of the Greeks.

[38] It must be recollected that the Peries are of both sexes: we have
just spoken of Peri _kings_, and of the _brothers_ of Merjân.

[39] In the Shâh Nâmeh it is said of Prince Siyawush, that when he was
born he was _bright as a Peri_. We find the poets everywhere comparing
female beauty to that of superior beings. The Greeks and Romans
compared a lovely woman to Venus, Diana, or the nymphs; the Persians
to a Peri; the ancient Scandinavians would say she was Frith sem
Alfkone, "fair as an Alf-woman;" and an Anglo-Saxon poet says of
Judith that she was _Elf-sheen_, or fair as an Elf. In the Lay of
Gugemer it is said,

      Dedenz la Dame unt trovée
      Ki de biauté resanbloit _Fée_.

The same expression occurs in Méon (3, 412); and in the Romant de la
Rose we meet, _jure que plus belle est que fée_ (10, 425). In the
Pentamerone it is said of a king's son, _lo quale essenno bello comme
a no fato_.

[40] Mines de l'Orient, vol. iii. p. 40. To make his version
completely English, M. von Hammer uses the word Fairies; we have
ventured to change it.

[41] In Purchas' Pilgrims, vol. i., quoted by Sir W. Ouseley.



