FOOTNOTES:

[317] The Anglo-Saxon Dweorg, Dworh, and the English Dwarf, do not
seem ever to have had any other sense than that of the Latin _nanus_.

[318] As quoted by Picart in his Notes on William of Newbridge. We
could not find it in the Collection of Histories, etc., by Martène and
Durand,--the only place where, to our knowledge, this chronicler's
works are printed.

[319] _Guilielmi Neubrigensis Historia, sive Chronica Rerum
Anglicarum._ Oxon. 1719, lib. i. c. 27.

[320] See above, p. 109.

[321] Otia Imperialia _apud Leibnitz Scriptores rerum Brunsvicarum_,
vol. i. p. 981.

[322] Vice calicis.

[323] Otia Imperialia _apud Leibnitz Scriptores rerum Brunsvicarum_,
vol. i. p. 980.

[324] There is, as far as we are aware, no vestige of these names
remaining in either the French or English language, and we cannot
conceive how the Latin names of sea-gods came to be applied to the
Gotho-German Kobolds, etc.

[325] Dimidium _pollicis_. Should we not read _pedis_?

[326] Otia Imperialia _apud Leibnitz Scriptores rerum Brunsvicarum_,
vol. i. p. 980.

[327] Can this name be connected with that of Grendel, the malignant
spirit in Beówulf?

[328] Edited for the Percy Society by J. P. Collyer, Esq., 1841. Mr.
Collyer says there is little doubt but that this work was printed
before 1588, or even 1584. We think this is true only of the First
Part; for the Second, which is of a different texture, must have been
added some time after tobacco had come into common use in England: see
the verses in p. 34.

[329] Mr. Collyer does not seem to have recollected that Huon de
Bordeaux had been translated by Lord Berners; see above, p. 56.

[330] It is, according to this authority the man-fairy Gunn that
steals children and leaves changelings.

[331] Discoverie of Witchcrafte, iv. ch. 10.

[332] R. Scot, Discoverie of Witchcrafte, ii. ch. 4.

[333] _Ib._ vii. 15.

[334] This appears to us to be rather a display of the author's
learning than an actual enumeration of the objects of popular terror;
for the maids hardly talked of Satyrs, Pans, etc. For Bull-beggar, see
p. 316; for Urchin, p. 319. _Hag_ is the Anglo-Saxon [Old English:
hægeise], German _hexe_, "witche," and hence the Nightmare (see p.
332) which was ascribed to witches; we still say _Hag-ridden_. Calcar
and Sporn (spurs?) may be the same, from the idea of riding: the
French call the Nightmare, _Cauchemare_, from _Caucher_, _calcare_.
Kit-wi-the-Canstick is Jack-with-the-Lanthorn. The Man in the Oak is
probably Puck, "Turn your cloakes, quoth hee, for Pucke is busy in
these oakes."--Iter Boreale. The Hell-wain is perhaps the Death-coach,
connected with Northern and German superstitions, and the Fire-drake
an Ignis Fatuus. Boneless may have been some impalpable spectre; the
other terms seem to be mere appellations of Puck.

[335] Anat. of Mel. p. 47.

[336] Chap. xx. p. 134. Lond. 1604.

[337] This is, we apprehend, an egg at Easter or on Good Friday.
_Housle_ is the Anglo-Saxon [Old English: husel]; Goth. _hunsl_,
sacrifice or offering, and thence the Eucharist.

[338] Terrors of the Night, 1594.

[339] Hutchinson, History of Cumberland, vol. i. p. 269.

[340] As quoted by Thoms in his Essay on Popular Songs, in the
Athenæum for 1847.

[341] Morgan, Phoenix Britannicus, Lond. 1732.

[342] Pandemonium, p. 207. Lond. 1684.

[343] Aubrey, Natural History of Surrey, iii 366, _ap._ Ritson, Fairy
Tales, p. 166.

[344] The Local Historian's Table-Book, by M. A. Richardson, iii. 239.
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1846.

[345] Bourne, Antiquitates Vulgares, 1725.

[346] Quoted by Brand in his Popular Antiquities, an enlarged edition
of Bourne's work.

[347] This word Pixy, is evidently Pucksy, the endearing diminutive
_sy_ being added to Puck, like Betsy, Nancy, Dixie. So Mrs. Trimmer in
her Fabulous Histories--which we read with wonderful pleasure in our
childhood, and would recommend to our young readers--calls her
hen-robins Pecksy and Flapsy. Pisgy is only Pixy transposed. Mrs. Bray
derives Pixy from Pygmy. At Truro, in Cornwall, as Mr. Thoms informs
us, the _moths_, which some regard as departed souls, others as
fairies, are called _Pisgies_. He observes the curious, but surely
casual, resemblance between this and the Greek [Greek: psychê], which
is both soul and moth. Grimm (p. 430) tells us from an old glossary,
that the caterpillar was named in Germany, _Alba_, i. e. _Elbe_, and
that the Alp often takes the form of a butterfly.

[348] _Whip says he_, as Mrs. Bray conjectures.

[349] Brand, Popular Antiquities, ii. 513. Bohn's edit.

[350] Given in the Literary Gazette for 1825. No. 430.

[351] Brand, Popular Antiquities, ii. 503. Bohn's edit.

[352] The _Elfbore_ of Scotland, where it is likewise ascribed to the
fairies, Jamieson, _s. v._ The same opinion prevails in Denmark, where
it is said that any one who looks through it will see things he would
not otherwise have known: see Thiele, ii. 18.

[353] The Anglo-Saxon _læan_, _laécan_, to play.

[354] We have abridged this legend from a well-written letter in the
Literary Gazette, No. 430 (1825), the writer of which says, he knew
the house in which it was said to have occurred. He also says he
remembered an old tailor, who said the horn was often pitched at the
head of himself and his apprentice, when in the North-country fashion
they went to work at the farm-house. Its identity with other legends
will be at once perceived.

[355] And true no doubt it is, _i. e._ the impression made on her
imagination was as strong as if the objects had been actually before
her. The narrator is the same person who told the preceding Boggart
story.

[356] Fairy Tales, pp. 24, 56.

[357] In Northumberland the common people call a certain fungous
excrescence, sometimes found about the roots of old trees,
Fairy-butter. After great rains and in a certain degree of
putrefaction, it is reduced to a consistency, which, together with its
colour, makes it not unlike butter, and hence the name. Brand, Popular
Antiquities, ii. 492, Bohn's edit.

The Menyn Tylna Têg or Fairy-butter of Wales, we are told in the same
place, is a substance found at a great depth in cavities of
limestone-rocks when sinking for lead-ore.

[358] Comp. Milton, L'Allegro, 105 _seq._

[359] Richardson, Table-Book, iii. 45; see above, p. 297.

[360] This word, as we may see, is spelt _faries_ in the following
legends; so we may suppose that _fairy_ is pronounced _farry_ in the
North, which has a curious coincidence with _Peri_: see above, p. 15.

[361] Probably pronounced _Poke_, as still in Worcestershire. Our
ancestors frequently used _ou_, or _oo_ for the long _o_ while they
expressed the sound of _oo_ by _o_ followed by _e_, as _rote_ root,
_coke_ cook, _more_ moor, _pole_ pool.

[362] Passus xvii. _v._ 11,323 _seq._ ed. 1842. Comp. _vv._ 8363,
9300, 10,902.

[363] Mr. Todd is right, in reading _pouke_ for _ponke_, an evident
typographic error: wrong in saying, "He is the Fairy, Robin
Good-fellow, known by the name of Puck." Robin is the "hob-goblin"
mentioned two lines after.

[364] We know nothing of the Oriental origin of Puck, and cannot give
our full assent to the character of our ancestry, as expressed in the
remaining part of Mr. Gifford's note: "but a fiend engendered in the
moody minds, and rude and gloomy fancies of the barbarous invaders of
the North." It is full time to have done with describing the old
Gothic race as savages.

[365] _Der Putz würde uns über berg und thäler tragen._ To frighten
children they say _Der Butz kommt!_ see Grimm, Deut. Mythol. p. 474.

[366] The former made by adding the Anglo-Saxon and English _el_,
_le_; the latter by adding the English _art_: see p. 318.

[367] By Sir F. Palgrave, from whose article in the Quarterly Review,
we have derived many of the terms named above. He adds that the
Anglo-Saxon _pæcan_ is to deceive, seduce; the Low-Saxon _picken_ to
gambol; _pickeln_ to play the fool; _pukra_ in Icelandic to make a
murmuring noise, to steal secretly; and _pukke_ in Danish to scold. He
further adds the Swedish _poika_ boy, the Anglo-Saxon and Swedish
_piga_ and Danish _pige_ girl. If, however, Pouke is connected with
the Sclavonic Bog, these at the most can be only derivations from it.
By the way _boy_ itself seems to be one of these terms; the
Anglo-Saxon _piga_ was probably pronounced _piya_, and _a_ is a
masculine termination in that language.

[368] See above, p. 291. In Low German, however, the Kobold is called
Bullmann, Bullermann, Bullerkater, from _bullen_, _bullern_, to knock:
see Grimm, _ut sup._ p. 473.

[369] Essay on the Ignis Fatuus, quoted by Thoms.

[370]

                      And you whose pastime
      Is to make midnight mushrooms.--_Tempest_, v. 1.


[371] Jack-o'-the-lanthorn, Will-o'-the-wisp. In Worcestershire they
call it Hob-and-his-lanthorn, and Hobany's- or Hobredy's-lanthorn.
Allies, _ut sup._

[372] Knight of the Burning Pestle: see above, p. 309.

[373] _Ard_ is the German _hart_, and is, like it, depreciatory. It is
not an Anglo-Saxon termination, but from the Anglo-Saxon [Old English:
doll], _dull_, we have _dullard_. May not _haggard_ be _hawk-ard_, and
the French _hagard_ be derived from it, and not the reverse?

[374] For in Anglo-Saxon _áttorcoppe_ (_Poison-head?_) is spider, and
from _áttorcoppe-web_, by the usual aphoeresis of the two first
syllables we put _coppe-web_, cobweb. May not the same have been the
case with _lob_? and may not the nasty _bug_ be in a similar manner
connected with Puck? As _dvergsnat_ is in Swedish a cobweb, one might
be tempted to suppose that this last, for which no good etymon has
been offered, was _lob-web_; but the true etymon is _cop-web_, from
its usual site.

      Upon the _cop_ right of his nose he hedde
      A wert.--Chaucer, _Cant. Tales_, _v._ 556.


[375] Deut. Mythol. p. 492.

[376] See _France_. _In_ is a mere termination, perhaps, like _on_, a
diminutive, as in _Catin_ Kate, _Robin_ Bob. _Lutin_ was also spelt
_Luyton_: see p. 42.

[377] The two lines which follow

      Fro the nightes mare the witè Paternoster!
      Where wonest thou Seint Peter's suster?

are rather perplexing. We would explain them thus. Bergerac, as quoted
by Brand (Pop. Antiq. i. 312. Bohn's edit.) makes a magician say "I
teach the shepherds the wolf's paternoster," _i. e._ one that keeps
off the wolf. _Wite_ may then be _i. q. wight_, and _wight
paternoster_ be a safeguard against the wights, and we would read the
verse thus: "Fro the nightes mare the wite paternoster" _sc. blisse
it_ or _us_. St. Peter's _suster_, _i. e._ wife (see I Cor. ix. 5) may
have been canonised in the popular creed, and held to be potent
against evil beings. The term _suster_ was used probably to obviate
the scandal of supposing the first Pope to have been a married man.
This charm is given at greater length and with some variations by
Cartwright in his Ordinary, Act iii. sc. 1.

[378] He derives it from the French _oursin_, but the Ang.-Sax. name
of the hedgehog is [Old English: erscen].

[379] Athenæum, Oct. 9, 1847.

[380] Hist. of England, i. 478, 8vo edit.

[381] Deut. Mythol. p. 419.

[382] Layamon's Brut, etc., by Sir Frederick Madden.

[383] Tales and Popular Fictions, ch. viii. We do not wonder that this
should have eluded previous observation, but it is really surprising
that we should have been the first to observe the resemblance between
Ariosto's tale of Giocondo and the introductory tale of the Thousand
and One Nights. It is also strange that no one should have noticed the
similarity between Ossian's Carthon and the tale of Soohrâb in the
Shâh-nâmeh.

[384] Both here and lower down we would take _faërie_ in its first
sense.

[385] _Thrope_, _thorpe_, or _dorp_, is a village, the German _dorf_;
Dutch _dorp_; we may still find it in the names of places, as
Althorpe. _Dorp_ occurs frequently in Drayton's Polyolbion; it is also
used by Dryden, Hind and Panther, _v._ 1905.

[386] _Undermeles_ i. e. _undertide_ (p 51), aftermeal, afternoon.

[387] This is the third sense of _Faërie_. In the next passage it is
doubtful whether it be the second or third sense; we think the latter.

[388]

      This wife which is of _faërie_,
      Of such a childe delivered is,
      Fro kindè which stante all amis.
                 GOWER, _Legende of Constance_.


[389] The derivation of Oberon has been already given (p. 208). The
Shakspearean commentators have not thought fit to inform us why the
poet designates the Fairy-queen, Titania. It, however, presents no
difficulty. It was the belief of those days that the Fairies were the
same as the classic Nymphs, the attendants of Diana: "That fourth kind
of spritis," says King James, "quhilk be the gentilis was called
Diana, and her wandering court, and amongst us called the _Phairie_."
The Fairy-queen was therefore the same as Diana, whom Ovid (Met. iii.
173) styles Titania; Chaucer, as we have seen, calls her Proserpina.

[390]

      'Twas I that led you through the painted meads,
      Where the light Fairies danced upon the flowers,
      Hanging on every leaf an orient pearl.
                  _Wisdom of Dr. Dodypoll, 1600. Steevens._

Men of fashion, in that age, wore earrings.

[391]

      And the yellow-skirted Fayes
      Fly after the night-steeds, leaving their moon-loved maze.
                               MILTON, _Ode on the Nativity_, 235.


[392] _Ouph_, Steevens complacently tells us, in the Teutonic
language, is a fairy; if by Teutonic he means the German, and we know
of no other, he merely showed his ignorance. Ouph is the same as _oaf_
(formerly spelt _aulf_), and is probably to be pronounced in the same
manner. It is formed from _elf_ by the usual change of _l_ into _u_.

[393] _i. e._ Pinch severely. The Ang.-Sax. [Old English: to] joined
to a verb or part. answers to the German _zu_ or _zer_. [Old English:
to-brecan] is to break to pieces, [Old English: to-drifan] to drive
asunder, scatter. Verbs of this kind occur in the Vision of Piers
Ploughman, in Chaucer and elsewhere. The part. is often preceded by
_all_, in the sense of the German _ganz_, quite, with which some
ignorantly join the _to_ as _all-to ruffled_ in Comus, 380, instead of
_all to-ruffled_. In Golding's Ovid (p. 15) we meet "With rugged head
as white as down, and garments _all to-torn_;" in Judges ix. 53, "and
_all to-brake_ his skull." See also Faerie Queene, iv. 7, 8; v. 8, 4,
43, 44; 9, 10.

[394] After all the commentators have written, this line is still nearly
unintelligible to us. It may relate to the supposed origin of the
fairies. For _orphan_, Warburton conjectured _ouphen_, from _ouph_.

[395] The Anglo-Saxon [Old English: Midan eard] or [Old English:
geard]; and is it not also plainly the Midgard of the Edda?

[396] The origin of Mab is very uncertain; it may be a contraction of
Habundia, see below _France_. "Mab," says Voss, one of the German
translators of Shakspeare, "is not the Fairy-queen, the same with
Titania, as some, misled by the word _queen_, have thought. That word
in old English, as in Danish, designates the female sex." He might
have added the Ang.-Sax. [Old English: cþen] woman, whence both
_queen_ and _quean_. Voss is perhaps right and _elf-queen_ may have
been used in the same manner as the Danish _Elle-quinde_, _Elle-kone_
for the female Elf. We find Phaer (see above, p. 11) using
_Fairy-queen_, as a translation for _Nympha_.

[397] _i. e._, Night-mare. "Many times," says Gull the fairy, "I get
on men and women, and so lie on their stomachs, that I cause them
great pain; for which they call me by the name of Hagge or
Night-mare." _Merry Pranks_, etc. p. 42.

[398]

      Auræque et venti, montesque, amnesque, lacusque,
      Dîque omnes nemorum, dîque omnes noctis, adeste.
                                    _Ovid, Met._ l. vii. 198.

      Ye ayres and winds, ye _elves_ of hills, of brooks, of woods, alone,
      Of standing lakes, and of the night--approach ye everich one.
                                                            GOLDING.

Golding seems to have regarded, by chance or with knowledge, the Elves
as a higher species than the Fairies. Misled by the word _elves_,
Shakspeare makes sad confusion of classic and Gothic mythology.

[399] _Take_ signifies here, to strike, to injure.

      And there he blasts the tree and _takes_ the cattle.
                                       _Merry Wives of Windsor_, iv. 4.

      Thou farest as fruit that with the frost is taken.
                                   SURREY, _Poems_, p. 13, Ald. edit.

In our old poetry _take_ also signifies, to give.

[400]

      But not a word of it,--'tis fairies' treasure,
      Which but revealed brings on the blabber's ruin.
                          MASSINGER, _Fatal Dowry_, Act iv. sc. 1.

      A prince's secrets are like fairy favours,
      Wholesome if kept, but poison if discovered.
                                             _Honest Man's Fortune._


[401] We do not recollect having met with any account of this prank;
but Jonson is usually so correct, that we may be certain it was a part
of the popular belief.

[402] Whalley was certainly right in proposing to read Agnes. This
ceremony is, we believe, still practised in the north of England on
St. Agnes' night. See Brand, i. 34.

[403] Shakespeare gives different colours to the Fairies; and in some
places they are still thought to be white. See p. 306.

[404] Act i. sc. 5. R. Dodsley's Old Plays, vii. p. 394. We quote this
as the first notice we have met of the red caps of the fairies.

[405] Brown, their author, was a native of Devon, the Pixy region;
hence their accordance with the Pixy legends given above.

[406] This is perhaps the dancing on the hearth of the fairy-ladies to
which Milton alludes: see above, p. 42. "Doth not the warm zeal of an
English-man's devotion make them maintain and defend the social hearth
as the sanctuary and chief place of residence of the tutelary lares
and household gods, and the only court where the _lady-fairies convene
to dance and revel_?"--Paradoxical Assertions, etc. 1664, quoted by
Brand, ii. p. 504.

[407] The reader will observe that the third sense of Fairy is the
most usual one in Drayton. It occurs in its second sense two lines
further on, twice in Nymphidia, and in the following passage of his
third Eclogue,

      For learned Colin (Spenser) lays his pipes to gage,
      And is to _Fayrie_ gone a pilgrimage,
        The more our moan.


[408] Mr. Chalmers does not seem to have known that the Crickets were
family of note in Fairy. Shakspeare (_Merry Wives of Windsor_)
mentions a Fairy named Cricket; and no hint of Shakspeare's was lost
upon Drayton.

[409] In the Musarum Deliciæ.

[410] This is a palpable mistake of the poet's. The Friar (see above,
p. 291) is the celebrated Friar Rush, who haunted houses, not fields,
and was never the same with Jack-o'-the-Lanthorn. It was probably the
name Rush, which suggested _rushlight_, that caused Milton's error. He
is the Brüder Rausch of Germany, the Broder Ruus of Denmark. His name
is either as Grimm thinks, _noise_, or as Wolf (Von Bruodor Rauschen,
p. xxviii.) deems _drunkenness_, our old word, _rouse_. Sir Walter
Scott in a note on Marmion, says also "Friar Rush, _alias_
Will-o'-the-Wisp. He was also a sort of Robin Goodfellow and
Jack-o'-Lanthorn," which is making precious confusion. Reginald Scot
more correctly describes him as being "for all the world such another
fellow as this Hudgin," _i. e._ Hödeken: see above, p. 255.

[411] Ben Jonson's Works, vol. ii. p. 499. We shall never cease to
regret that the state to which literature has come in this country
almost precludes even a hope of our ever being able to publish our
meditated edition of Milton's poems for which we have been collecting
materials these five and twenty years. It would have been very
different from Todd's. [Published in 1859.]

[412] Evidently drawn from Dryden's Flower and Leaf.

[413] We meet here for the last time with Fairy in its collective
sense, or rather, perhaps, as the country:

      All Fairy shouted with a general voice

[414] In Mr Halliwell's Illustrations of Fairy Mythology, will be
found a good deal of Fairy poetry, for which we have not had space in
this work.



