                                             _Honest Man's Fortune._


[401] We do not recollect having met with any account of this prank;
but Jonson is usually so correct, that we may be certain it was a part
of the popular belief.

[402] Whalley was certainly right in proposing to read Agnes. This
ceremony is, we believe, still practised in the north of England on
St. Agnes' night. See Brand, i. 34.

[403] Shakespeare gives different colours to the Fairies; and in some
places they are still thought to be white. See p. 306.

[404] Act i. sc. 5. R. Dodsley's Old Plays, vii. p. 394. We quote this
as the first notice we have met of the red caps of the fairies.

[405] Brown, their author, was a native of Devon, the Pixy region;
hence their accordance with the Pixy legends given above.

[406] This is perhaps the dancing on the hearth of the fairy-ladies to
which Milton alludes: see above, p. 42. "Doth not the warm zeal of an
English-man's devotion make them maintain and defend the social hearth
as the sanctuary and chief place of residence of the tutelary lares
and household gods, and the only court where the _lady-fairies convene
to dance and revel_?"--Paradoxical Assertions, etc. 1664, quoted by
Brand, ii. p. 504.

[407] The reader will observe that the third sense of Fairy is the
most usual one in Drayton. It occurs in its second sense two lines
further on, twice in Nymphidia, and in the following passage of his
third Eclogue,

      For learned Colin (Spenser) lays his pipes to gage,
      And is to _Fayrie_ gone a pilgrimage,
        The more our moan.


[408] Mr. Chalmers does not seem to have known that the Crickets were
family of note in Fairy. Shakspeare (_Merry Wives of Windsor_)
mentions a Fairy named Cricket; and no hint of Shakspeare's was lost
upon Drayton.

[409] In the Musarum Deliciæ.

[410] This is a palpable mistake of the poet's. The Friar (see above,
p. 291) is the celebrated Friar Rush, who haunted houses, not fields,
and was never the same with Jack-o'-the-Lanthorn. It was probably the
name Rush, which suggested _rushlight_, that caused Milton's error. He
is the Brüder Rausch of Germany, the Broder Ruus of Denmark. His name
is either as Grimm thinks, _noise_, or as Wolf (Von Bruodor Rauschen,
p. xxviii.) deems _drunkenness_, our old word, _rouse_. Sir Walter
Scott in a note on Marmion, says also "Friar Rush, _alias_
Will-o'-the-Wisp. He was also a sort of Robin Goodfellow and
Jack-o'-Lanthorn," which is making precious confusion. Reginald Scot
more correctly describes him as being "for all the world such another
fellow as this Hudgin," _i. e._ Hödeken: see above, p. 255.

[411] Ben Jonson's Works, vol. ii. p. 499. We shall never cease to
regret that the state to which literature has come in this country
almost precludes even a hope of our ever being able to publish our
meditated edition of Milton's poems for which we have been collecting
materials these five and twenty years. It would have been very
different from Todd's. [Published in 1859.]

[412] Evidently drawn from Dryden's Flower and Leaf.

[413] We meet here for the last time with Fairy in its collective
sense, or rather, perhaps, as the country:

      All Fairy shouted with a general voice

[414] In Mr Halliwell's Illustrations of Fairy Mythology, will be
found a good deal of Fairy poetry, for which we have not had space in
this work.



