                                ITALY.

      Faune Nympharum fugientum amator,
      Per meos fines et aprica rura
      Lenis incedas, abeasque parvis
          Ã†quus alumnis.
                              HORATIUS.


Unfortunately for our knowledge of the ancient Italian mythology, the
ballad-poetry of Rome is irrecoverably lost. A similar fate has
befallen the literature of Etruria, Umbria, and other parts of the
peninsula. The powerful influence exercised by Grecian genius over the
conquerors of the Grecian states utterly annihilated all that was
national and domestic in literature. Not but that Latin poetry abounds
in mythologic matter; but it is the mythology of Greece, not of Italy;
and the reader of Virgil and Ovid will observe with surprise how
little of what he meets in their works is Italian.

So much however of the population of ancient Italy, particularly of
Latium, was Pelasgian, that it is natural to suppose a great
similarity between the religious systems of Latium and Hellas. The
Latins do not, however, appear to have believed in choirs of Nymphs.
Those we read of, such as Egeria, Anna Perenna, Juturna, are all
solitary, all dwellers of fountains, streams, and lakes. The Italian
Diana did not, like the Grecian Artemis, speed over the mountains
attended by a train of buskined nymphs. No Dryads sought to avert the
fate of their kindred trees--no Nereides sported on the waves.

Dwarfish deities they had none. We are indeed told of the Lars,
particularly the rural Lars, as answering to the Gothic Dwarfs; but no
proofs are offered except the diminutive size of their statues. This
we hold to amount to nothing. Are we to suppose the following lines of
Plautus to have been delivered by an "eyas?"

      Lest any marvel who I am, I shall
      Briefly declare it. I am the family Lar
      Of this house whence you see me coming out.
      'Tis many years now that I keep and guard
      This family; both father and grandsire
      Of him that has it now, I aye protected.
      Now his grandsire intrusted me a treasure
      Of gold, that I, unknown to all, should keep it.

             *       *       *       *       *