FOOTNOTES:

[501] Aulularia, Prologue.

[502] See our Mythology of Greece and Italy, p. 543; and our Ovid's
Fasti, Excursus iv.

[503] Satyricon, ch. 38. _Sunt qui eundem_ (Hercules) _Incubonem esse
velint_. Schol. Hor. Sat. ii. 6, 13.

[504] Viessieux, Italy and the Italians, vol. i. pp. 161, 162.

[505] _L'huorco_, the Orco of Bojardo and Ariosto, probably derived
from the Latin Orcus: see Mythol. of Greece and Italy, p. 527. In this
derivation we find that we had been anticipated by Minucci in his
notes on the Malmantile Racquistato, c. ii. st. 50.

In a work, from which we have derived some information (Lettres sur
les Contes des Fées, Paris, 1826), considerable pains are taken, we
think to little purpose, to deduce the French Ogre from the Oïgours, a
Tartar tribe, who with the other tribes of that people invaded Europe
in the twelfth century. In the Glossaire de la Langue Romaine, Ogre is
explained by Hongrois. Any one, however, that reads the Pentamerone
will see that the ugly, cruel, man-eating Huorco is plainly an Ogre;
and those expert at the _tours de passe passe_ of etymology will be at
no loss to Ogre from Orco. See Tales and Popular Fictions, p. 223.

[506] In another of these tales, it is said of a young man, who, on
breaking open a cask, found a beautiful maiden in it, that he stood
for a while _comme o chillo che ha visto lo Monaciello_.

[507] See Tales and Popular Fictions, chap. ix. p. 269; see also
_Spain_ and _France_.

[508] Vincentius apud Kornmann, _de Miraculis Vivorum_.

[509] This being, unknown to classic mythology, is first mentioned by
Lactantius. It was probably from Boccaccio's Genealogia Deorum that
Bojardo got his knowledge of him.

[510] I Cinque Canti, c. i. st. l. _seq._

[511] Lib. II. xvii. 56, _seq._

[512] There is, however, a Maga or Fata named Falsirena in the Adone
of Marini.

[513] La Sabia and La Desconocida of the original romance, which Tasse
follows very closely in everything relating to Amadis and Oriana.

[514] Few of our readers, we presume, are acquainted with this poem, and
they will perhaps be surprised to learn that it is, after the Furioso,
the most beautiful romantic poem in the Italian language, graceful and
sweet almost to excess. It is strange that it should be neglected in
Italy also. One cause may be its length (One Hundred Cantos), another
the constant and inartificial breaking off of the stories, and perhaps
the chief one, its serious moral tone so different from that of Ariosto.
It might be styled The Legend of Constancy, for the love of its heroes
and heroines is proof against all temptations. Mr. Panizzi's charge of
abounding in scandalous stories, is not correct, for it is in reality
more delicate than even the Faerie Queene. Ginguené, who admired it,
appreciates it far more justly.

[515] See Tales and Popular Fictions, p. 183. The Pentamerone we may
observe, was not a title given to it by the author; in like manner the
only title Fielding gave his great work was The History of a Foundling.

[516] He was brother to Adriana and uncle to Leonora Baroni, the
ladies whose musical talents Milton celebrates.

[517] Ex. gr. Fiume is _shiume_; Fiore, _shiure_; Piaggia, _chiaja_;
Piombo, _chiummo_; Biondo, _ghiunno_. There are likewise numerous
Hispanicisms. Thus _gaiola_ in Gagliuso which we all rendered
_coffin_, is the Spanish _jaula_, cage, and the meaning apparently is
that he would have the cat stuffed and put in a glass-case; in like
manner calling the eyes suns (as in _na bellezza a doje sole_) occurs
in the plays of Calderon.

[518] In the Taschenbuch für altdeutscher Zeit und Kunst, 1816.



