FOOTNOTES:

[599] As we have above given an etymon of _cobweb_, we will here
repeat our note on the word _gossamer_ in the Fairy Legends.

"Gossamers, Johnson says, are the long white cobwebs which fly in the
air in calm sunny weather, and he derives the word from the Low Latin
_gossapium_. This is altogether unsatisfactory. The gossamers are the
cobwebs which may be seen, particularly of a still autumnal morning,
in such numbers on the furze-bushes, and which are raised by the wind
and floated through the air, as thus exquisitely pictured by Browne in
his Britannia's Pastorals (ii. 2),

      The milk-white gossamers not upwards snowed.

Every lover of nature must have observed and admired the beautiful
appearance of the gossamers in the early morning, when covered with
dew-drops, which, like prisms, separate the rays of light, and shoot
the blue, red, yellow, and other colours of the _spectrum_, in
brilliant confusion. Of King Oberon we are told--

      A riche mantle he did wear,
      Made of tinsel gossamer,
      Bestrew'd over with a few
      Diamond drops of morning dew.

A much more probable origin of _gossamer_ than that proposed by
Johnson is suggested by what has been now stated. _Gossamer_ is, we
think, a corruption of _gorse_, or _goss samyt_, i. e. the _samyt_, or
finely-woven silken web that lies on the _gorse_ or furze. Voss, in a
note on his Luise (iii. 17), says that the popular belief in Germany
is, that the gossamers are woven by the Dwarfs.

[600] In the notes on this story Mr. Croker gives the following
letter:--

    "The accuracy of the following story I can vouch for, having heard
    it told several times by the person who saw the circumstances.

     "About twenty years back, William Cody, churn-boy to a person
     near Cork, had, after finishing his day's work, to go through six
     or eight fields to his own house, about twelve o'clock at night.
     He was passing alongside of the ditch of a large field, and
     coming near a quarry, he heard a great cracking of whips on the
     other side. He went on to a gap in the same ditch, and out rode a
     little horseman, dressed in green, and mounted in the best
     manner, who put a whip to his breast, and made him stop until
     several hundred horsemen, all dressed alike, rode out of the gap
     at full speed, and swept round a glen. When the last horseman was
     clear off, the sentinel clapt spurs to his horse, gave three
     cracks of his whip, and was out of sight in a second.

     "The person would swear to the truth of the above, as he was
     quite sober and sensible at the time. The place had always before
     the name of being very _airy_ [the Scottish _eirie_].

  "_Royal Cork Institution_,                               P. BATH.
       _June 3, 1825._"

[601] An abridgment of _Leprechaun_, see p. 371.

[602] This wonderful tune is, we fear, a transference we made from
Scandinavia. See above, p. 79.

[603] We must here make an honest confession. This story had no
foundation but the German legend in p. 259. All that is not to be
found there is our own pure invention. Yet we afterwards found that it
was well-known on the coast of Cork and Wicklow. "But," said one of
our informants, "It was things like flower-pots he kept them in." So
faithful is popular tradition in these matters! In this and the
following tale there are some traits by another hand which we are now
unable to discriminate.

[604] It is not very likely that the inventor of this legend knew
anything about the Amadigi of B. Tasso, yet in that poem we meet this
circumstance more than once. In c. ii., when night falls on the young
knight Alidoro, in the open country, he finds a pavilion pitched
beside a fountain, with lights in it, and hears a voice which invites
him to enter it. He there sups and goes to sleep in a rich bed, and on
awaking in the morning (iii. 38) finds himself lying in the open air.
Another time (c. viii) he comes to a fair inn, in a wild region, where
he is entertained and his wounds are dressed by a gentle damsel, and
on awaking in the morning he finds himself lying under a tree. The
tent and inn were the work of his protectress, the Fairy Silvana.
Another Fairy, Argea, entertains (c. xxxiii.) a king, queen, knight
and ladies, in a stately palace. At night they retire to magnificent
chambers, and in the morning they find themselves lying in a mead,
some under trees, others on the sides of a stream, with more of the
beauties of the ladies displayed than they could have desired.



