                              THE ALFAR.

      Ther ro meth Alfum.
                       BRYNHILDAR QUIDA.

      Those are with the Alfs.

In the prose Edda, Ganglar inquires what other cities beside that in
which the Nornir dwelt were by the Urdar fount, under the Ash
Yggdrasil.[99] Hár replies,

"There are many fair cities there. There is the city which is called
Alf-heim, where dwelleth the people that is called Liosálfar (_Light
Alfs_). But the Döckálfar (_Dark Alfs_) dwell below under ground, and
are unlike them in appearance, and still more unlike in actions. The
Liosálfar are whiter than the sun in appearance, but the Döckálfar are
blacker than pitch."[100]

The Nornir, the Parcæ, or Destinies of Scandinavian mythology, are
closely connected with the Alfar.

"Many fair cities are there in Heaven," says Hár, "and the divine
protection is over all. There standeth a city under the ash near the
spring, and out of its halls came three maids, who are thus named,
Udr, Verthandi, Skulld (_Past_, _Present_, _Future_). These maids
shape the life of man. We call them Nornir. But there are many Nornir;
those who come to each child that is born, to shape its life, are of
the race of the gods; but others are of the race of the Alfs; and the
third of the race of dwarfs. As is here expressed,

      Sundry children deem I
      The Nornir to be--the same
      Race they have not.
      Some are of Æser-kin,
      Some are of Alf-kin,
      Some are the daughters of Dualin." (_i.e._ of the Dwarfs.)

"Then," said Ganglar, "if the Nornir direct the future destiny of men,
they shape it very unequally. Some have a good life and rich, but some
have little wealth and praise, some long life, some short." "The good
Nornir, and well descended," says Hár, "shape a good life; but as to
those who meet with misfortune, it is caused by the malignant Nornir."

These Nornir bear a remarkable resemblance to the classical Parcæ and
to the fairies of romance. They are all alike represented as assisting
at the birth of eminent personages, as bestowing gifts either good or
evil, and as foretelling the future fortune of the being that has just
entered on existence.[101] This attribute of the fairies may have been
derived from either the north or the south, but certainly these did
not borrow from each other.

Of the origin of the word Alf nothing satisfactory is to be found.
Some think it is akin to the Latin _albus_, white; others, to _alpes_,
Alps, mountains. There is also supposed to be some mysterious
connexion between it and the word Elf, or Elv, signifying water in the
northern languages; an analogy which has been thought to correspond
with that between the Latin Nympha and Lympha. Both relations,
however, are perhaps rather fanciful than just. Of the derivation of
Alf, as just observed, we know nothing certain,[102] and the original
meaning of Nympha would appear to be a new-married woman,[103] and
thence a marriageable young woman; and it was applied to the supposed
inhabitants of the mountains, seas, and streams, on the same principle
that the northern nations gave them the appellation of men and women,
that is, from their imagined resemblance to the human form.

Whatever its origin, the word Alf has continued till the present day
in all the Teutonic languages. The Danes have _Elv_, pl. _Elve_; the
Swedes, _Elf_ pl. _Elfvar_ m. _Elfvor_ f.; and the words _Elf-dans_
and _Elf-blæst_, together with _Olof_ and other proper names, are
derived from them. The Germans call the nightmare _Alp_; and in their
old poems we meet with _Elbe_ and _Elbinne_, and _Elbisch_ occurs in
them in the bad sense of _elvish_ of Chaucer and our old romancers;
and a number of proper names, such as Alprecht, Alphart, Alpinc,
Alpwin,[104] were formed from it, undoubtedly before it got its
present ill sense.[105] In the Anglo-Saxon, [Old English: Ælf], or
[Old English: Ælfen], with its feminine and plural, frequently occurs.
The Oreas, Naias, and Hamodryas of the Greeks and Romans are rendered
in an Anglo-Saxon glossary by [Old English: Munt-ælfen], [Old English:
sæ-ælfen], and [Old English: feld-ælfen].[106] [Old English: Ælf] is a
component part of the proper names Ælfred and Ælfric; and the author
of the poem of Judith says that his heroine was [Old English:
Ælf-seine] (_Elf-sheen_), bright or fair as an elf. But of the
character and acts of the elfs no traditions have been preserved in
Anglo-Saxon literature. In the English language, Elf, Elves, and their
derivatives are to be found in every period, from its first formation
down to this present time.
