FOOTNOTES:

[90] _Edda_ signifies grandmother. Some regard it as the feminine of
_othr_, or _odr_, wisdom.

[91] This language is so called because still spoken in Iceland. Its
proper name is the Norræna Tunga (_northern tongue_). It was the
common language of the whole North.

[92] See Tales and Popular Fictions, chap. ix.

[93] It was first published by Resenius in 1665.

[94] By the Æser are understood the Asiatics, who with Odin brought
their arts and religion into Scandinavia. This derivation of the word,
however, is rather dubious. Though possibly the population and
religion of Scandinavia came originally from Asia there seems to be no
reason whatever for putting any faith in the legend of Odin. It is not
unlikely that the name of their gods, Æser, gave birth to the whole
theory. It is remarkable that the ancient Etrurians also should have
called the gods Æsar.

[95] So the lötunn or Giant Vafthrudnir to Odin in the
Vafthrudnismal.--Strophe vii.

[96] Thorlacius, Noget om Thor og hans Hammer, in the Skandinavisk
Museum for 1803.

[97] Thorlacius, _ut supra_, says the thundering Thor was regarded as
particularly inimical to the Skovtrolds, against whom he continually
employed his mighty weapon. He thinks that the _Bidental_ of the
Romans, and the rites connected with it, seem to suppose a similar
superstition, and that in the well-known passage of Horace,

      Tu parum castis inimica mittes
              Fulmina lucis,

the words _parum castis lucis_ may mean groves or parts of woods, the
haunt of unclean spirits or Skovtrolds, _satyri lascivi et salaces_.
The word _Trold_ will be explained below.

[98] The Dark Alfs were probably different from the Duergar, yet the
language of the prose Edda is in some places such as to lead to a
confusion of them. The following passage, however, seems to be decisive:

      Náir, Dvergar
      _Ok_ Döck-A'lfar.
                   Hrafna-Galdr Othins, xxiv. 7.

      Ghosts, Dwarfs
      _And_ Dark Alfs.

Yet the Scandinavian literati appear unanimous in regarding them as
the same. Grimm, however, agrees with us in viewing the Döck-Alfar as
distinct from the Duergar. As the abode of these last is named
Svartálfaheimr, he thinks that the Svartálfar and the Duergar were the
same.--Deutsche Mythologie, p. 413, _seq._ See below, _Isle of Rügen_.

[99] The ash-tree, Yggdrasil, is the symbol of the universe, the
Urdar-fount is the fount of light and heat, which invigorates and
sustains it. A good representation of this myth is given in Mr. Bohn's
edition of Mallet's "Northern Antiquities," which the reader is
recommended to consult.

[100] This Grimm (_ut sup._) regards as an error of the writer, who
confounded the _Döck_ and the _Svartálfar_.

[101] See Tales and Popular Fictions, p. 274.

[102] The analogy of Deev, and other words of like import, might lead
to the supposition of Spirit being the primary meaning of Alf.

[103] See Mythology of Greece and Italy, p. 248, second edition.

[104] After the introduction of Christianity, _Engel_, angel, was
employed for _Alp_ in most proper names, as Engelrich, Engelhart, etc.

[105] See MM. Grimm's learned Introduction to their translation of the
Irish Fairy Legends, and the Deutsche Mythologie of J. Grimm.

[106] MM. Grimm suppose with a good deal of probability, that these
are compounds formed to render the Greek ones, and are not expressive
of a belief in analogous classes of spirits.



