
Like Alf, the word Duergr has retained its place in the Teutonic
languages. Dverg[120] is the term still used in the north; the Germans
have Zwerg, and we Dwarf,[121] which, however, is never synonymous
with Fairy, as Elf is. Ihre rejects all the etymons proposed for it,
such, for example, as that of Gudmund Andre√¶, [Greek: theoi ergon];
and with abundant reason.

Some have thought that by the Dwarfs were to be understood the Finns,
the original inhabitants of the country, who were driven to the
mountains by the Scandinavians, and who probably excelled the
new-comers in the art of working their mines and manufacturing their
produce. Thorlacius, on the contrary, thinks that it was Odin and his
followers, who came from the country of the Chalybes, that brought the
metallurgic arts into Scandinavia.

Perhaps the simplest account of the origin of the Dwarfs is, that
when, in the spirit of all ancient religions, the subterranean powers
of nature were to be personified, the authors of the system, from
observing that people of small stature usually excel in craft and
ingenuity, took occasion to represent the beings who formed crystals
and purified metals within the bowels of the earth as of diminutive
size, which also corresponded better with the power assigned them of
slipping through the fissures and interstices of rocks and stones.
Similar observations led to the representation of the wild and awful
powers of brute nature under the form of huge giants.
