FOOTNOTES:

[107] Some think, but with little reason, they were originally a part
of the Finnish mythology, and were adopted into the Gothic system.

[108] The giant Ymir is a personification of Chaos, the undigested
primal matter. The sons of Börr (other personifications) slew him. Out
of him they formed the world; his blood made the sea, his flesh the
land, his bones the mountains; rocks and cliffs were his teeth, jaws,
and broken pieces of bones; his skull formed the heavens.

[109] Gudmund Andreas in notis ad Völuspá.

[110] That they are not insensible to kindness one of the succeeding
tales will show.

[111] The habitual reader of the northern and German writers, or even
our old English ones, will observe with surprise his gradually
diminished contempt for many expressions now become vulgar. He will
find himself imperceptibly falling into the habit of regarding them in
the light of their pristine dignity.

[112] Skidbladni, like Pari Banou's tent, could expand and contract as
required. It would carry all the Æser and their arms, and when not in
use it could be taken asunder and put in a purse. "A good ship," says
Ganglar, "is Skidbladni, but great art must have been employed in
making it." Mythologists say it is the clouds.

[113] _i. e._ The _Dripper_.

[114] _i. e._ The _Bruiser_ or _Crusher_, from _Myla_, to bruise or
crush. Little the Fancy know of the high connexions of their phrase
_Mill_.

[115] Edda Resenii, Dæmisaga 59.

[116] Thorston's Saga, c. 3, in the Kämpa Dater.

[117] The Berserkers were warriors who used to be inflamed with such
rage and fury at the thoughts of combats as to bite their shields, run
through fire, swallow burning coals, and perform such like mad feats.
"Whether the avidity for fighting or the ferocity of their nature,"
says Saxo, "brought this madness on them, is uncertain."

[118] The northern nations believed that the tombs of their heroes
emitted a kind of lambent flame, which was always visible in the
night, and served to guard the ashes of the dead; they called it
_Hauga Elldr_, or The Sepulchral Fire. It was supposed more
particularly to surround such tombs as contained hidden
treasures.--_Bartholin, de Contempt. a Dan. Morte_, p. 275.

[119] Hervarar Saga _passim_. The Tirfing Saga would be its more
proper appellation. In poetic and romantic interest it exceeds all the
northern Sagas.

[120] In Swedish Dverg also signifies a spider.

[121] In the old Swedish metrical history of Alexander, the word
_Duerf_ occurs. The progress in the English word is as follows:
Anglo-Saxon [Old English: dþeorg]; thence _dwerke_;

      A maid that is a messingere
      And a _dwerkè_ me brought here,
          Her to do socoúr.
                            _Lybeaus Disconus._

lastly, _dwarf_, as in old Swedish.



