
The same is told of a far greater than Esbern Snare. As St. Olaf, the
royal apostle of the North, was one day going over hill and dale,
thinking how he could contrive to build a splendid church without
distressing his people by taxation, he was met by a man of a strange
appearance, who asking him what he was thinking about, Olaf told him,
and the Troll, or rather Giant (_JÃ¤tte_), for such he was, undertook
to do it within a certain time, stipulating, for his reward, the sun
and moon, or else St. Olaf himself. Olaf agreed, but gave such a plan
for the church as it seemed to be impossible ever could be executed.
It was to be so large that seven priests could preach in it at the
same time without disturbing each other; the columns and other
ornaments both within and without should be of hard flintstone, and so
forth. It soon, however, was finished, all but the roof and pinnacle.
Olaf, now grown uneasy, rambled once more over hill and dale, when he
chanced to hear a child crying within a hill, and a giantess, its
mother, saying to it, "Hush, hush! Thy father, Wind-and-Weather, will
come home in the morning, and bring with him the sun and moon, or else
St. Olaf himself." Olaf was overjoyed, for the power of evil beings
ceases when their name is known. He returned home, where he saw every
thing completed--pinnacle and all. He immediately cried out,
"Wind-and-Weather, you've set the pinnacle crooked!"[181] Instantly
the Giant fell with a great crash from the ridge of the roof, and
broke into a thousand pieces, which were all flintstone.[182]

