                          _The Changeling._

There lived once, near Tiis lake, two lonely people, who were sadly
plagued with a changeling, given them by the underground-people
instead of their own child, which had not been baptised in time. This
changeling behaved in a very strange and uncommon manner, for when
there was no one in the place, he was in great spirits, ran up the
walls like a cat, sat under the roof, and shouted and bawled away
lustily; but sat dozing at the end of the table when any one was in
the room with him. He was able to eat as much as any four, and never
cared what it was that was set before him; but though he regarded not
the quality of his food, in quantity he was never satisfied, and gave
excessive annoyance to every one in the house.

When they had tried for a long time in vain how they could best get
rid of him, since there was no living in the house with him, a smart
girl pledged herself that she would banish him from the house. She
accordingly, while he was out in the fields, took a pig and killed it,
and put it, hide, hair, and all, into a black pudding, and set it
before him when he came home. He began, as was his custom, to gobble
it up, but when he had eaten for some time, he began to relax a little
in his efforts, and at last he sat quite still, with his knife in his
hand, looking at the pudding.

At length, after sitting for some time in this manner, he began--"A
pudding with hide!--and a pudding with hair! a pudding with eyes!--and
a pudding with legs in it! Well, three times have I seen a young wood
by Tiis lake, but never yet did I see such a pudding! The devil
himself may stay here now for me!" So saying, he ran off with himself,
and never more came back again.[192]

       *       *       *       *       *