                                     _Launfal._


[166] _Men jag vet at sorge är tung._

[167] Wain, our readers hardly need be informed, originally signified
any kind of carriage: see Faerie Queene, _passim_. It is the Ang. Sax.
þæn, and not a contraction of _waggon_.

[168] From Vermland and Upland.

[169] This we suppose to be the meaning of _hemmagifta_, as it is that
of _hemgift_, the only word approaching to it that we have met in our
dictionary.

[170] _Brandcreatur_, a word of which we cannot ascertain the exact
meaning. We doubt greatly if the following _hielmeta_ be helmets.

[171] Grimm (Deut. Mythol. p. 435) has extracted this legend from the
Bahuslän of Ödman, who, as he observes, and as we may see, relates it
quite seriously, and with the real names of persons. It is we believe
the only legend of the union of a _man_ with one of the hill-folk.

[172] "Three kings' ransoms" is a common maximum with a Danish peasant
when speaking of treasure.

[173]

      "Rid paa det Bolde,
       Og ikke paa det Knolde."


[174] _Oral._ This is an adventure common to many countries. The
church of Vigersted in Zealand has a cup obtained in the same way. The
man, in this case, took refuge in the church, and was there besieged
by the Trolls till morning. The bridge of Hagbro in Jutland got its
name from a similar event. When the man rode off with the silver jug
from the beautiful maiden who presented it to him, an old crone set
off in pursuit of him with such velocity, that she would surely have
caught him, but that providentially he came to a running water. The
pursuer, however, like Nannie with Tam o' Shanter, caught the horse's
hind leg, but was only able to keep one of the cocks of his shoe:
hence the bridge was called Hagbro, _i. e._ Cock Bridge.

[175] _Oral._ Tiis Lake is in Zealand. It is the general belief of the
peasantry that there are now very few Trolls in the country, for the
ringing of bells has driven them all away, they, like the Stille-folk
of the Germans, delighting in quiet and silence. It is said that a
farmer having found a Troll sitting very disconsolate on a stone near
Tiis Lake, and taking him at first for a decent Christian man,
accosted him with--"Well! where are you going, friend?" "Ah!" said he,
in a melancholy tone, "I am going off out of the country. I cannot
live here any longer, they keep such eternal ringing and dinging!"

"There is a high hill," says Kalm (Resa, &c. p. 136), "near Botna in
Sweden, in which formerly dwelt a Troll. When they got up bells in Botna
church, and he heard the ringing of them, he is related to have said:

      "_Det är så godt i det Botnaberg at bo,
      Vore ikke den leda Bjälleko._"

      "Pleasant it were in Botnahill to dwell,
      Were it not for the sound of that plaguey bell."


[176] This story is told by Rabelais with his characteristic humour
and extravagance. As there are no Trolls in France, it is the devil
who is deceived in the French version. A legend similar to this is
told of the district of Lujhmân in Afghanistân (Masson, Narrative,
etc., iii. 297); but there it was the Shâitan (_Satan_) that cheated
the farmers. The legends are surely independent fictions.

[177] _Oral._ Gudmanstrup is in Zealand. In Ouröe, a little island
close to Zealand, there is a hill whence the Trolls used to come down
and supply themselves with provisions out of the farmers' pantries.
Niel Jensen, who lived close to the hill, finding that they were
making, as he thought, over free with his provisions, took the liberty
of putting a lock on the door through which they had access. But he
had better have left it alone, for his daughter grew stone blind, and
never recovered her sight till the lock was removed.--_Resenii Atlas_,
i. 10. There is a similar story in Grimm's Deutsche Sagen, i. p. 55.

[178] This legend is oral.

[179]

                    _Tie stille, barn min!
                    Imorgen kommer Fin,
                    Fa'er din,
      Og gi'er dig Esbern Snares öine og hjerte at lege med._


[180] _Oral._ Kallundborg is in Zealand. Mr. Thiele says he saw four
pillars at the church. The same story is told of the cathedral of Lund
in Funen, which was built by the Troll Finn at the desire of St.
Laurentius.

Of Esbern Snare, Holberg says, "The common people tell wonderful
stories of him, and how the devil carried him off; which, with other
things, will serve to prove that he was an able man."

The German story of Rumpelstilzchen (Kinder and Haus-Märchen, No. 55)
is similar to this legend. MM. Grimm, in their note on this story,
notice the unexpected manner in which, in the Thousand and One Days,
or Persian Tales, the princess Turandot learns the name of Calaf.

[181]

      _Wind och Veder!
      Du har satt spiran spedar!_

Others say it was

      _Blaster! sätt spiran väster!_
      Blester! set the pinnacle westwards!

Or,

      _Slät! sätt spiran rätt!_
      Slätt! set the pinnacle straight!


[182] Afzelius Sago-häfder, iii. 83. Grimm, Deut. Mythol. p. 515.

[183] This event happened in Jutland. The Troll's dread of thunder
seems to be founded in the mythologic narratives of Thor's enmity to
the Trolls.

[184] Groute, Danish _Gröd_, is a species of food like furmety, made
of shelled oats or barley. It is boiled and eaten with milk or butter.

[185]

      _Hör du Plat,
      Siig til din Kat,
      At Knurremurre er död._


[186] The scene of this story is in Zealand. The same is related of a
hill called Ornehöi in the same island. The writer has heard it in
Ireland, but they were cats who addressed the man as he passed by the
churchyard where they were assembled.

[187] This legend was orally related to Mr. Thiele.

[188] Hülpher, Samlingen om Jämtland. Westeras, 1775. p. 210 _ap._
Grimm, Deut. Mythol., p. 425.

[189] Ödmans Bahuslän, _ap._ Grimm. Deut. Mythol. p. 426. Ödman also
tells of a man who, as he was going along one day with his dog, came
on a hill-smith at his work, using a stone as an anvil. He had on him
a light grey coat and a black woollen hat. The dog began to bark at
him, but he put on so menacing an attitude that they both deemed it
advisable to go away.

[190] Thiele, iv. 120. In both these legends we find the tradition of
the artistic skill of the Duergar and of Völundr still retained by the
peasantry: see Tales and Popular Fictions, p. 270.

[191] Thiele, iv. 21. In Otmar's Volksagen, there is a German legend
of Peter Klaus, who slept a sleep of twenty years in the bowling green
of the Kyffhäuser, from which Washington Irving made his Ripp van
Winkle. We shall also find it in the Highlands of Scotland. It is the
Irish legend of Clough na Cuddy, so extremely well told by Mr. C.
Croker (to which, by the way, we contributed a Latin song), in the
notes to which further information will be found. The Seven Sleepers
seems to be the original.

[192] _Oral._ See the Young Piper and the Brewery of Egg-shells in the
Irish Fairy Legends, with the notes. The same story is also to be
found in Germany where the object is to make the changeling laugh. The
mother breaks an egg in two and sets water down to boil in each half
shell. The imp then cries out: "Well! I'm as old as the Westerwald,
but never before saw I any one cooking in egg-shells," and burst out
laughing at it. Instantly the true child was returned.--Kinder and
Haus-Märchen, iii. 39. Grose also tells the story in his Provincial
Glossary. The mother there breaks a dozen of eggs and sets the shells
before the child, who says, "I was seven years old when I came to
nurse, and I have lived four since, and yet I never saw so many
milkpans." See also Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border, and below,
_Wales_, _Brittany_, _France_.

[193] This legend is taken from Resenn Atlas, i. 36.

[194] Vendsyssel and Aalborg are both in North Jutland.--The story is
told by the ferrymen to travellers: see Mythology of Greece and Italy,
p. 68.

[195] See above p. 89. According to what Mr. Thiele was told in
Zealand, Svend Fælling must have been of prodigious size, for there is
a hill near Steenstrup on which he used to sit while he washed his
feet and hands in the sea, about half a quarter of a mile distant. The
people of Holmstrup dressed a dinner for him, and brought it to him in
large brewing vessels, much as the good people of Lilliput did with
Gulliver. This reminds us of Holger Danske, who once wanted a new suit
of clothes. Twelve tailors were employed: they set ladders to his back
and shoulders, as was done to Gulliver, and they measured away; but
the man that was highest on the right side ladder chanced, as he was
cutting a mark in the measure, to clip Holger's ear. Holger,
forgetting what it was, hastily put up his hand to his head, caught
the poor tailor, and crushed him to death between his fingers.

[196] This tale was taken from oral recitation by Dr. Grimm, and
inserted in Hauff's Märchenalmanach for 1827. Dr. Grimm's fidelity to
tradition is too well known to leave any doubt of its genuineness.

[197] Aslög (_Light of the Aser_) is the name of the lovely daughter
of Sigurd and Brynhilda, who became the wife of Ragnar Lodbrok. How
beautiful and romantic is the account in the Volsunga Saga of old
Heimer taking her, when an infant, and carrying her about with him in
his harp, to save her from those who sought her life as the last of
Sigurd's race; his retiring to remote streams and waterfalls to wash
her, and his stilling her cries by the music of his harp!

[198] This is Saint Oluf or Olave, the warlike apostle of the North.

[199] A legend similar to this is told of Saint Oluf in various parts
of Scandinavia. The following is an example:--As he was sailing by the
high strand-hills in Hornsherred, in which a giantess abode, she cried
out to him,

      Saint Oluf with the red beard hear!
      My cellar-wall thou'rt sailing too near!

Oluf was incensed, and instead of guiding the ship through the rocks,
he turned it toward the hill, replying:

      Hearken thou witch with thy spindle and rock!
      There shalt thou sit and be a stone-block!

and scarcely had he spoken when the hill burst and the giantess was
turned into stone. She is still seen sitting on the east side with her
rock and spindle; out of the opposite mass sprang a holy well. Grimm.
Deutsche Mythologie, p. 516.




                              NISSES.[200]

      Og Trolde, Hexer, Nisser i hver Vraae.