FOOTNOTES:

[205] _Berg_ signifies a larger eminence, mountain, hill; _Hög_, a
height, hillock. The _Hög-folk_ are Elves and musicians.

[206] The Danish peasantry in Wormius' time described the Nökke
(Nikke) as a monster with a human head, that dwells both in fresh and
salt water. When any one was drowned, they said, _Nökken tog ham bort_
(the Nökke took him away); and when any drowned person was found with
the nose red, they said the Nikke has sucked him: _Nikken har suet
ham._--Magnusen, Eddalære. Denmark being a country without any streams
of magnitude, we meet in the Danske Folkesagn no legends of the Nökke;
and in ballads, such as "The Power of the Harp," what in Sweden is
ascribed to the Neck, is in Denmark imputed to the Havmand or Merman.

[207] The Neck is also believed to appear in the form of a complete
horse, and can be made to work at the plough, if a bridle of a
particular description be employed.--_Kalm's Vestgötha Resa_.

[208] Afzelius, Sago-häfdar, ii. 156.

[209]

      _Det tredje slag på gullharpan klang,
      Liten Kerstin räckta upp sin snöhvita arm.
            Min hjerteliga kär!
            J sägen mig hvarfor J sörjen!_


[210] As sung in West Gothland and Vermland.

[211] _Fosse_ is the North of England _force_.

[212] Or a white kid, Faye _ap._ Grimm, Deut. Mythol., p. 461.

[213] The Strömkarl has eleven different measures, to ten of which
alone people may dance; the eleventh belongs to the night spirit his
host. If any one plays it, tables and benches, cans and cups, old men
and women, blind and lame, even the children in the cradle, begin to
dance.--Arndt. _ut sup._, see above p. 80.

[214] In the Danske Viser and Folkesagn there are a few stories of
Mermen, such as Rosmer Havmand and Marstig's Daughter, both translated
by Dr. Jamieson, and Agnete and the Merman, which resembles Proud
Margaret. It was natural, says Afzelius, that what in Sweden was
related of a Hill King, should, in Denmark, be ascribed to a Merman.

[215] The appearance of the Wood-woman (_Skogsfru_) or Elve-woman, is
equally unlucky for hunters. She also approaches the fires, and seeks
to seduce young men.

[216] Arvidsson, ii. 320, _ap._ Grimm, p. 463.

[217] This is a ballad from Småland. Magnus was the youngest son of
Gustavus Vasa. He died out of his mind. It is well known that insanity
pervaded the Vasa family for centuries.



