FOOTNOTES:

[218] This was plainly a theory of the monks. It greatly resembles the
Rabbinical account of the origin of the Mazckeen, which the reader
will meet in the sequel.

Some Icelanders of the present day say, that one day, when Eve was
washing her children at the running water, God suddenly called her.
She was frightened, and thrust aside such of them as were not clean.
God asked her if all her children were there, and she said, Yes; but
got for answer, that what she tried to hide from God should be hidden
from man. These children became instantly invisible and distinct from
the rest. Before the flood came on, God put them into a cave and
closed up the entrance. From them are descended all the
underground-people.--Magnussen, _Eddalære_.

[219] This was one Janus Gudmund, who wrote several treatises on this
and similar subjects, particularly one "De Alfis et Alfheimum," which
the learned bishop characterises as a work "nullins pretii, et meras
nugas continens." We might, if we were to see it, be of a different
opinion. Of Janus Gudmund Brynj Svenonius thus expresses himself to
Wormius: _Janus Gudmundius, ære dirutus verius quam rude donatus, sibi
et aliis inutilis in angulo consenuit_. Worm., Epist., 970.

[220] The Icelandic dwarfs, it would appear, wore red clothes. In
Nial's Saga (p. 70), a person gaily dressed (_i litklædum_) is
jocularly called Red-elf (_raud-álfr_).

[221] There was a book of prophecies called the _Kruckspá_, or
Prophecy of Kruck, a man who was said to have lived in the 15th
century. It treated of the change of religion and other matters said
to have been revealed to him by the Dwarfs. Johannæus says it was
forged by Brynjalf Svenonius in or about the year 1660.

[222] Finni Johannæi Historia Ecclesiastica Islandiæ, tom. ii. p. 368.
Havniæ, 1774. We believe we might safely add, is held at the present
day, for the superstition is no more extinct in Iceland than elsewhere.

[223] Svenska Visor, iii. 128. Grimm, Deut. Mythol., p. 458. At Bahus,
in Sweden, a clever man contrived to throw on him an ingeniously made
bridle so that he could not get away, and he ploughed all his land
with him. One time the bridle fell off and the Neck, like a flash of
fire, sprang into the lake and dragged the harrow down with him.
Grimm, _ut sup._, see p. 148.



