FOOTNOTES:

[245] The only remnant is _Alp_, the nightmare; the _elfen_ of modern
writers is merely an adoption of the English _elves_.

[246] The edition of this poem which we have used, is that by
Schönhuth, Leipzig, 1841.

[247] Tarn from _taren_, to dare, says Dobenek, because it gave
courage along with invisibility. It comes more probably we think from
the old German _ternen_, to hide. Kappe is properly a cloak, though
the Tarnkappe or Nebelkappe is generally represented as a cap, or hat.

[248] From _hehlen_, to conceal.

[249] _Horny Siegfred_; for when he slew the dragon, he bathed himself
in his blood, and became horny and invulnerable everywhere except in
one spot between his shoulders, where a linden leaf stuck. In the
Nibelungen Lied, (_st. 100_), Hagene says,

      Yet still more know I of him--this to me is certaín,
      A terrible Lind-dragon the hero's hand hath slain;
      He in the blood him bathed, and horny grew his skin;
      Hence woundeth him no weapon, full oft it hath been seen.


[250] MM. Grimm thought at one time that this name was properly Engel,
and that it was connected with the chances of Alp, Alf, to Engel (see
above, p. 67). They query at what time the dim _Engelein_ first came
into use, and when the angels were first represented under the form of
children--a practice evidently derived from the idea of the Elves. In
Otfried and other writers of the ninth and tenth centuries, they say,
the angels are depicted as young men; but in the latter half of the
thirteenth, a popular preacher named Berthold, says: _Ir schet wol daz
si allesamt sint juncliche gemälet; als ein kint daz dá vünf jâr all
ist swâ man sie mâlet._

[251] Elberich, (the Albrich of the Nibelungen Lied,) as we have said
(above p. 40), is Oberon. From the usual change of _l_ into _u_ (as
_al_, _au_, _col_, _cou_, etc.), in the French language, Elberich or
Albrich (derived from Alp, Alf) becomes Auberich; and _ich_ not being
a French termination, the diminutive _on_ was substituted, and so it
became Auberon, or Oberon; a much more likely origin than the usual
one from _L'aube du jour_. For this derivation of Oberon we are
indebted to Dr. Grimm.

[252] Probably Saida, _i.e._ Sidon.

[253] _i. e._ Mount Tabor.

[254] This may have suggested the well-known circumstance in Huon de
Bordeaux.

[255] So Oberon in Huon de Bordeaux.

[256] Str. 1564, _seq._

[257] Grimm, Deut. Mythol., p. 398, _seq._

[258] See above, pp. 19, 169; below, _Ireland_; and Grimm, _ut sup._
p. 1216. The swan-dresses also occur in the Arabian tales of Jahânshâh
and Hassan of Bassora in Trebutien's Arabian Nights.

[259] Poésies de Marie de France, i. 177, _seq._



