                    _The Dwarfs' Borrowing Bread._

Albert Steffel, aged seventy years, who died in the year 1680, and
Hans Kohmann, aged thirty-six, who died in 1679, two honest, veracious
men, frequently declared that as one time Kohmann's grandfather was
working in his ground which lay in the neighbourhood of the place
called the Dwarfs' hole, and his wife had brought out to the field to
him for his breakfast some fresh baked bread, and had laid it, tied up
in a napkin, at the end of the field, there came up soon after a
little Dwarf-woman, who spoke to him about his bread, saying, that
her own was in the oven, and that her children were hungry and could
not wait for it, but that if he would give her his, she would be
certain to replace it by noon. The man consented, and at noon she
returned, spread out a very white little cloth, and laid on it a
smoking hot loaf, and with many thanks and entreaties told him he
might eat the bread without any apprehension, and that she would
return for the cloth. He did as she desired, and when she returned she
told him that there had been so many forges erected that she was quite
annoyed, and would be obliged to depart and abandon her favourite
dwelling. She also said that the shocking cursing and swearing of the
people drove her away, as also the profanation of Sunday, as the
country people, instead of going to church, used to go look at their
fields, which was altogether sinful.[272]

