                          _The Changeling._

It was the belief, in some parts of Germany, that if a child that was
not thriving were taken to a place named Cyriac's Mead, near
Neuhausen, and left lying there and given to drink out of Cyriac's
Well, at the end of nine days it would either die or recover.

The butler and cook of one of the spiritual lords of Germany, without
being married, had a child, which kept crying day and night, and
evermore craving for food and yet it never grew nor throve. It was
finally resolved to try on it the effect of Cyriac's Mead, and the
mother set out for that place with the child on her back, whose weight
was so great that she hardly could endure it. As she was toiling along
under her burden, she met a travelling student, who said to her, "My
good woman, what sort of a wild creature is that you are carrying? I
should not wonder if it were to crush in your neck." She replied that
it was her dear child which would not grow nor thrive, and that she
was taking it to Neuhausen to be rocked. "But," said he, "that is not
your child; it is the devil. Fling it into the stream." But she
refused, and maintained that it _was_ her child, and kissed it. Then
said he, "Your child is at home in the inner bedroom in a new cradle
behind the ark. Throw, I tell you, this monster into the stream." With
many tears and groans the poor woman at length did as he required and
immediately there was heard under the bridge on which they were
standing a howling and a growling as if wolves and bears were in the
place. When the woman reached home she found her own child healthy and
lively and laughing in its new cradle.
