
A Hessian legend tells that as a woman was reaping corn at the
Dosenberg,[273] with her little child lying near her on the ground, a
Dwarf-woman (_wichtelweib_) came and took it and left her own lying in
its stead. When the mother came to look after her dear babe a great
ugly jolterhead was there gaping at her. She cried out and roared
Murder! so lustily that the thief came back with the child. But she
did not restore it till the mother had put the changeling to her
breast and given it some ennobling human milk.[274]

       *       *       *       *       *

There was, it is said, in Prussian Samland, an inn-keeper whom the
underground folk had done many good turns. It grieved him to see what
bad clothes they had, and he desired his wife to leave new little
coats for them. They took the new clothes, but cried out, "Paid off!
Paid off!" and went all away.

Another time they gave great help to a poor smith, and every night
they made bran-new pots, pans, kettles and plates for him. His wife
used to leave some milk for them, on which they fell like wolves, and
drained the vessel to the bottom, and then cleaned it and went to
their work. When the smith had grown rich by means of them, his wife
made for each of them a pretty little red coat and cap, and left them
in their way. "Paid off! Paid off!" cried they, slipped on the new
clothes, and went away without working the iron that was left for
them, and never returned.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a being named a Scrat or Schrat, Schretel, Schretlein.[276]
This name is used in old German to translate _pilosus_ in the
narratives of those who wrote in Latin, and it seems sometimes to
denote a House- sometimes a Wood-spirit. Terms similar to it are to be
found in the cognate languages, and it is perhaps the origin of Old
Scratch, a popular English name of the devil.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is, chiefly in Southern Germany, a species of beings that
greatly resemble the Dwarfs. They are called Wichtlein (_Little
Wights_), and are about three quarters of an ell high. Their
appearance is that of old men with long beards. They haunt the mines,
and are dressed like miners, with a white hood to their shirts and
leather aprons, and are provided with lanterns, mallets, and hammers.
They amuse themselves with pelting the workmen with small stones, but
do them no injury, except when they are abused and cursed by them.

They show themselves most especially in places where there is an
abundance of ore, and the miners are always glad to see them; they
flit about in the pits and shafts, and appear to work very hard,
though they in reality do nothing. Sometimes they seem as if working a
vein, at other times putting the ore into buckets, at other times
working at the windlass, but all is mere show. They frequently call,
and when one comes there is no one to be seen.

At Kuttenburg, in Bohemia, the Wichtlein have been seen in great
numbers. They announce the death of a miner by knocking three times,
and when any misfortune is about to happen they are heard digging,
pounding, and imitating all other kinds of work. At times they make a
noise, as if they were smiths labouring very hard at the anvil, hence
the Bohemians call them Haus-Schmiedlein (_Little House-smiths_).

In Istria the miners set, every day, in a particular place, a little
pot with food in it for them. They also at certain times in each year
buy a little red coat, the size of a small boy's, and make the
Wichtlein a present of it. If they neglect this, the little people
grow very angry.[277]

       *       *       *       *       *

In Southern Germany they believe in a species of beings somewhat like
the Dwarfs, called Wild, Wood, Timber, and Moss-people. These
generally live together in society, but they sometimes appear singly.
They are small in stature, yet somewhat larger than the Elf, being the
size of children of three years, grey and old-looking, hairy and clad
in moss. The women are of a more amiable temper than the men, which
last live further back in the woods; they wear green clothes faced
with red, and cocked-hats. The women come to the wood-cutters and ask
them for something to eat; they also take it away of themselves out of
the pots; but they always make a return in some way or other, often by
giving good advice. Sometimes they help people in their cooking or
washing and haymaking, and they feed the cattle. They are fond of
coming where people are baking, and beg of them to bake for them also
a piece of dough the size of half a mill-stone, and to leave it in a
certain place. They sometimes, in return, bring some of their own
baking to the ploughman, which they lay in the furrow or on the
plough, and they are greatly offended if it is rejected. The
wood-woman sometimes comes with a broken wheel-barrow, and begs to
have the wheel repaired, and she pays by the chips which turn into
gold, or she gives to knitters a ball of thread which is never ended.
A woman who good-naturedly gave her breast to a crying Wood-child, was
rewarded by its mother by a gift of the bark on which it was lying.
She broke a splinter off it and threw it into her faggot, and on
reaching home she found it was pure gold. Their lives are attached,
like those of the Hamadryads, to the trees, and if any one causes by
friction the inner bark to loosen a Wood-woman dies.

Their great enemy is the Wild-Huntsman, who driving invisibly through
the air pursues and kills them. A peasant one time hearing the usual
baying and cheering in a wood, would join in the cry. Next morning he
found hanging at his stable-door a quarter of a green Moss-woman as his
share of the game. When the woodmen are felling timber they cut three
crosses in a spot of the tree that is to be hewn, and the Moss-women sit
in the middle of these and so are safe from the Wild-Huntsman.[278]

       *       *       *       *       *

The following account of the popular belief in the parts of Germany
adjacent to Jutland has been given by a late writer.[279]

In Friesland the Dwarfs are named Oennereeske, in some of the islands
Oennerb√§nske, and in Holstein Unnerorske.[280] The same stories are
told of them as of the Dwarfs and Fairies elsewhere. They take away,
and keep for long periods, girls with whom they have fallen in love;
they steal children and leave changelings in their stead, the remedy
against which is to lay a bible under the child's pillow; they lend
and borrow pots, plates, and such like, sometimes lending money with
or even without interest; they aid to build houses and churches; help
the peasant when his cart has stuck in the mire, and will bring him
water and pancakes to refresh him when at work in the fields.


