                          _Inge of Rantum._

The Friesland girls are, however, rather shy of these matches, and if
they have unwarily been drawn into an engagement they try to get out
of it if they possibly can.

A girl named Inge of Rantum had some way or other got into an
engagement with one of the Underground people. The wedding-day was
actually fixed, and she could only be released from her bond on one
condition--that of being able, before it came, to tell the real name
of her lover. All her efforts to that effect were in vain, the dreaded
day was fast approaching and she fell into deep melancholy. On the
morning of her wedding-day she went out and strolled in sorrowful mood
through the fields, saying to herself, as she plucked some flowers,
"Far happier are these flowers than I." As she was stooping to gather
them, she thought she heard a noise under the ground. She listened and
recognised it as the voice at her lover, who, in the excess of his joy
at the arrival of his wedding-day, was frolicking and singing, "To-day
I must bake and boil and roast and broil and wash and brew; for this
is my wedding-day. My bride is the fair Inge of Rantum, and my name is
Ekke Nekkepem. Hurrah! Nobody knows _that_ but myself!" "Aye, but _I_
know it too!" said Inge softly to herself, and she placed her nosegay
in her bosom and went home. Toward evening came the Dwarf to claim his
bride. "Many thanks, dear Ekke Nekkepem," said she, "but if you please
I would rather stay where I am." The smiling face of the bridegroom
grew dark as thunder, but he recollected how he had divulged his
secret, and saw that the affair was past remedy.[281]
