FOOTNOTES:

[260] Another term is Wicht and its dim. Wichtlein, answering to the
Scandinavian Vættr and the Anglo-Saxon _wiht_, English _wight_, all of
which signify a being, a person, and also a thing in general. Thus our
words _aught_ and _naught_ were _anwiht_ and _nawiht_.

[261] See Grimm's Deutsche Sagen, vol. i. p. 38. As this work is our
chief authority for the Fairy Mythology of Germany, our materials are
to be considered as taken from it, unless when otherwise expressed.

[262] In Lusatia (Lausatz) if not in the rest of Germany, the same idea
of the Dwarfs being fallen angels, prevails as in other countries: see
the tale of the Fairies'-sabbath in the work quoted above, p. 179.

[263] This tale is given by MM. Grimm, from the Brixener Volksbuch.
1782.

[264] Related by Hammelmann in the Oldenburg Chronicle, by Prætorius,
Bräuner, and others.

[265]

      _Frühmorgens eh die Sonn aufgeht
      Schon alles vor dem Berge steht._


[266] This tale was orally related to MM. Grimm in Saxony. They do not
mention the narrator's rank in life.

[267]

      _Dat is gaut dat de büerkem dat nich weit
      Dat de sunne üm twölwe up geit._


[268] Grimm, Deut. Mythol., p. 434. Both legends are in the Low-Saxon
dialect.

[269] The terms used in the original are _Wichtelmänner_,
_Wichtelmännerchen_, and _Wichtel_.

[270] The Saxon ó seems to answer to the Anglo-Saxon [Old English:
Ig], Irish _Inis_: see below, _Ireland_.

[271] Grimm, Deut. Mythol., p. 428. The latter story is in the
Low-Saxon dialect.

[272] In Scandinavia the Dwarfs used to borrow beer, even a barrel at
a time, which one of them would carry off on his shoulders, Thiele i.
121. In the Highlands of Scotland, a firlot of meal. In all cases they
paid honestly. On one occasion, a dwarf came to a lady named Fru
(_Mrs._) Mettè of Overgaard, in Jutland, and asked her to lend her
silk gown to Fru Mettè of Undergaard, for her wedding. She gave it,
but as it was not returned as soon as she expected, she went to the
hill and demanded it aloud. The hill-man brought it out to her all
spotted with wax, and told her that if she had not been so impatient,
every spot on it would have been a diamond. Thiele iii. 48.

The Vends of Lüneburg, we are told, called the underground folk
Görzoni (from _gora_, hill), and the hills are still shown in which
they dwelt. They used to borrow bread from people; they intimated
their desire invisibly, and people used to lay it for them outside of
the door. In the evening they returned it, knocking at the window, and
leaving an additional cake to express their thankfulness. Grimm, Deut.
Mythol., p. 423.

[273] See above, p. 225.

[274] Grimm, Deut. Mythol., p. 437.

[275] Grimm, Deut. Mythol., p. 453.

[276] See Grimm, _ut sup._, p. 447 _seq._

[277] Deutsche Sagen, from Prætorius., Agricola, and others.

[278] Grimm, Deut. Mythol., pp. 451, 881.

[279] Kohl, Die Marschen und Inseln der Herzogthümer Schleswig und
Holstein.

[280] These terms all signify _Underground folk_.

[281] See above, p. 116.

[282] The Puk is also called Niss-Puk, Huis-Puk, Niske, Niske-Puk,
Nise-Bok, Niss-Kuk--all compounds or corruptions of Nisse and Puk. He
is also named from his racketing and noise Pulter-Claas, _i. e._ Nick
Knocker, (the German Poltergeist,) Claas being the abbreviation of
Nicolaus, Niclas; see above, p. 139, for this same origin of Nisse.



