OTHER DEATH OMENS.

The Cock.--It was once thought in all parts of Wales that the crowing
of a cock before or about midnight was a sign of death; but whether
one of the family or one of a neighbour's family was going to die,
it depended on the direction of the cock's head whilst crowing.

The Hen.--A hen crowing like a cock is also supposed to indicate
a death in the family or some very near relation; or if not death,
some very bad luck.

A hen laying two eggs in the same day was also a sign of death. A
hen laying a small egg was also a bad sign.

An Owl persistently screeching near a house or a raven croaking
hoarsely also indicated a death.

The Dog.--A dog howling, which is called in Welsh Ci-yn-udo, is a
sign of a death.

The Death Watch.--A sound made by a small insect like the ticking of
a watch was once considered a sign of death. A few years ago a sound
of this kind was for a long time heard at a house in the parish of
Llanddewi Brefi; but as no one died in the house, the family was
cured of the superstition.

The sound in the ear as of a bell, is a token of death in the family.

Clothes Burning.--A farmer's wife near Aberystwyth, informed me that
a few years ago she placed a servant boy's wet trousers on a chair
to dry before the fire. Then she went out to milk the cows, but when
she returned to the house she found that the trousers was burnt. A
few days after this her mother died.

The untimely blossoming of a tree is another sign of a death.

Yarrow and Heather.--Bringing either yarrow or heather into a house
is a presage of death; white heather, however, is a sign of good luck.

Death-pinch.--This is a mark that cannot be accounted for, appearing
suddenly on any part of the body, and is a sign of the death of one
of the family or a relative.

A Funeral Procession moving too fast is a sign that another funeral
will soon follow.


