CONVERSING WITH THE DEPARTED IN A DREAM.

The following appeared in the "Weekly Mail," Cardiff, for June 18,
1910:--"The Rev. Hugh Roberts, Rhydymain, Dolgelly, discoursed on
"The Intermediate State" on a recent Sunday, and in the course of the
sermon related the substance of a conversation which he had had with
departed friends. "Recently in a dream," he said, "I conversed with an
old deacon friend who has been in the intermediate state for some time,
and was assured by him that he was not in a state of inertia by any
means. It is a 'country' where everybody has something to do--where
one and all contribute to make each other happy. However, they pine
even in the intermediate state--some are longing for the circles
which they left on earth, others pining for their bodies. But all
longing will cease when the Spirit has completed the heavenly bodies."

Welshpeople believe that if a young girl dreams that she has a long
hair, that she will marry a very wise man.

To dream of being well-dressed is a sign of wealth and prosperity,
especially if you are dressed in silks.

If a person dreams that he is going to get married, it foretells
sickness.

If a man dreams that he is surrounded by pigs, some one will come to
him to ask him for some money.

To dream of a horseshoe is a sign of good news.

Welshpeople generally believe that it is not good for any one to dream
that he is losing his teeth, and that it means either a death or the
loss of friends.

To dream of bacon is also considered bad.

If a young man dreams of a full barn, it means that he will marry a
wealthy young woman.

Those who are interested in the interpretation of dreams must consult
dream-books, as I am not expected to enter fully into such subject
here.






