FAIRIES COMING INTO THE BEDROOM OF A HOUSE NEAR ABERYSTWYTH.

One Robert Burton, in his "History of the Principality of Wales,"
published 215 years ago, says:--"John Lewes, Esq., a Justice of
Peace at Glankerrig, near Aberystwyth, in this county, in the year
1656, by several letters to Mr. B. A., late worthy divine deceased,
gives an account of several strange apparitions in Carmarthenshire,
Pembrokeshire, and this county (Cardiganshire), about that time,
confirmed by divers persons of good quality and reputation the
substance of whereof are as followeth. A man and his family being all
in bed, he being awake about midnight, perceived by a light entering
the little room where he lay, and about a dozen in the shapes of men,
and two or three women with small children in their arms following,
they seemed to dance, and the chamber appeared much wider and lighter
than formerly. They seemed to eat bread and cheese all about a kind
of a tick upon the ground, they offered him some, and would smile
upon him, he heard no voice, but calling once upon God to bless him,
he heard a whispering voice in Welsh bidding him hold his peace. They
continued there about four hours, all which time he endeavoured to
wake his wife but could not. Afterwards they went into another room,
and having danced awhile departed. He then arose, and though the room
was very small, yet he could neither find the door, nor the way to
bed again until crying out his wife and family awoke.

"He living within two miles of Justice Lewes, he sent for him, being
a poor honest husbandman and of good report, and made him believe he
would put him to his oath about the truth of this Relation, who was
very ready to take it."


