THE EVIL ONE APPEARING AT NAG'S HEAD IN THE FORM OF A DOG.

"As Mr. David Walter, of Pembrokeshire, a religious man, and far from
fear and superstition, was travelling by himself through a field
called the Cot Moor, where there are two stones set up called the
Devil's Nags, which are said to be haunted, he was suddenly seized
and thrown over a hedge. He went there another day, taking with him
for protection a strong fighting mastiff dog. When he had come near
the Devil's Nags there appeared in his path the apparition of a dog
more terrible than any he had ever seen. In vain he tried to set his
mastiff on; the huge beast crouched, frightened by his master's feet
and refused to attack the spectre. Whereupon his master boldly stooped
to pick up a stone thinking that would frighten the evil dog; but
suddenly a circle of fire surrounded it, which lighting up the gloom,
showed the white snip down to the dog's nose, and his grinning teeth,
and white tail. He then knew it was one of the infernal dogs of hell."



"THE OLD GENTLEMAN" APPEARING IN PEMBROKESHIRE, AS A BLACK CALF.

A black calf was supposed to haunt a stream that flowed across the
road that leads from Narberth in Pembrokeshire to the adjacent village
Cold Blow. People returning late that way were sure to get frightened
as they passed and, as a consequence, they would go a long distance
out of their way to avoid the haunted stream. One night, or rather
early morning, two villagers were going home from a fair caught the
terrible calf and took it home, locking it up safely with some cattle,
but it had vanished when morning came.


