PREFACE


The Central Eskimo live away up north in that great American
archipelago which lies between Hudson Bay, Baffin Bay, and the Arctic
Ocean; an archipelago in which the islands are so large, so numerous,
and so irregular in outline that, as one looks at a map of them, he
could fancy they were "chunks" of the continent which had been broken
to pieces by some huge iceberg that bumped into it.

The land is ice-bound during so much of the year that the inhabitants
cannot depend upon getting a living by the cultivation of the soil,
and have to subsist almost entirely upon meat which they get from
reindeer, seal, bear, whale, and walrus.

In summer their clothing is of sealskin and fishskin; and in winter it
is of the thicker reindeer hides. Their life is a hard one owing to
the rigorous climate, and they make it harder by their superstitions,
for diseases are supposed to be cured by charms and incantations of
the shaman or priest; and everything in the way of hunting, fishing,
cooking, or of clothing themselves must be done in a prescribed way or
it is "taboo" or "hoodoo" as the negroes say. When you read "The Baby
Eskimo" you will see just a tiny bit of the hardships, but I should
not like to tell you how much more terrible a time he might have had,
if he had happened to be a girl baby.

By referring to the Table of Contents you will note that the first
group of tales were told by the Central Eskimo. The second group were
derived from the Eskimo living along Bering Strait, to the west; and
it is interesting to compare many of these folk tales along similar
subjects.

The writer is indebted to the Sixth Ethnological Report, issued by the
U. S. Government, for many of the legends found in the Central Eskimo
group; and to the Eighteenth Report for many of those from Bering
Strait. She wishes to express her thanks for this invaluable and
unique material.



